A Comparative Study of Glottal Source Estimation
Techniques

arXiv:2001.00840v1 [cs.SD] 28 Dec 2019

Thomas Drugmana , Baris Bozkurtb , Thierry Dutoita
a

b

TCTS Lab, University of Mons, 31 Boulevard Dolez, 7000 Mons, Belgium
Department of Electrical & Electronics Engineering, Izmir Institute of Technology,
Gulbahce Koyu 35430, Urla, Izmir, Turkey

Abstract
Source-tract decomposition (or glottal flow estimation) is one of the basic problems of speech processing. For this, several techniques have been
proposed in the literature. However studies comparing different approaches
are almost nonexistent. Besides, experiments have been systematically performed either on synthetic speech or on sustained vowels. In this study we
compare three of the main representative state-of-the-art methods of glottal
flow estimation: closed-phase inverse filtering, iterative and adaptive inverse
filtering, and mixed-phase decomposition. These techniques are first submitted to an objective assessment test on synthetic speech signals. Their
sensitivity to various factors affecting the estimation quality, as well as their
robustness to noise are studied. In a second experiment, their ability to label voice quality (tensed, modal, soft) is studied on a large corpus of real
connected speech. It is shown that changes of voice quality are reflected by
significant modifications in glottal feature distributions. Techniques based
on the mixed-phase decomposition and on a closed-phase inverse filtering
process turn out to give the best results on both clean synthetic and real
speech signals. On the other hand, iterative and adaptive inverse filtering is
recommended in noisy environments for its high robustness.
Keywords:
Source-tract Separation, Glottal Flow Estimation, Inverse Filtering,
Mixed-Phase Decomposition, Voice Quality

Preprint submitted to Computer Speech and Language

January 6, 2020

1. Introduction
Speech results from filtering the glottal flow by the vocal tract cavities,
and converting the resulting velocity flow into pressure at the lips (Quatieri,
2002). In many speech processing applications, it is important to separate the
contributions from the glottis and the vocal tract. Achieving such a sourcefilter deconvolution could lead to a distinct characterization and modeling of
these two components, as well as to a better understanding of the human
phonation process. Such a decomposition is thus a preliminary condition
for the study of glottal-based vocal effects, which can be segmental (as for
vocal fry), or be controlled by speakers on a separate, supra-segmental layer
(as it is the case for the voice quality modifications mentioned in Section
5). Their dynamics is very different from that of the vocal tract contribution, and requires further investigation. Glottal source estimation is then
a fundamental problem in speech processing, finding applications in speech
synthesis (Cabral et al., 2008), voice pathology detection (Drugman et al.,
2009b), speaker recognition (Plumpe et al., 1999), emotion analysis/synthesis
(Airas and Alku, 2006), etc.
In this paper, we limit our scope to the methods which perform an estimation of the glottal source contribution directly from the speech waveform.
Although some devices such as electroglottographs or laryngographs, which
measure the impedance between the vocal folds (but not the glottal flow itself), are informative about the glottal behaviour (Henrich et al., 2004), in
most cases the use of such aparatus is inconvenient and only the speech signal
is available for analysis. This problem is then a typical case of blind separation, since neither the vocal tract nor the glottal contribution are observable.
This also implies that no quantitative assessment of the performance of glottal source estimation techniques is possible on natural speech, as no target
reference signal is available.
As one of the basic problems and challenges of speech processing research,
glottal flow estimation has been studied by many researchers and various
techniques are available in the literature (Walker and Murphy, 2007). However the diversity of algorithms and the fact that the reference for the actual
glottal flow is not available often leads to the questionability about relative
effectiveness of the methods in real life applications. In most of studies,
tests are performed either on synthetic speech or on a few recorded sustained
vowels. In addition, very few comparative studies exist (such as (Sturmel
et al., 2007)). In this paper, we compare three of the main representative
2

state-of-the-art methods: closed-phase inverse filtering, iterative and adaptive inverse filtering, and mixed-phase decomposition. For testing, we first
follow the common approach of using a large set of synthetic speech signals
(by varying synthesis parameters independently), and then we examine how
these techniques perform on a large real speech corpus. In the synthetic
speech tests, the original glottal flow is available, so that objective measures
of decomposition quality can be computed. In real speech tests the ability of
the methods to discriminate different voice qualities (tensed, modal and soft)
is studied on a large database (without limiting data to sustained vowels).
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 the main state-of-the-art
methods for glottal source estimation are reviewed, and the three techniques
compared in this study are detailed. Section 3 discusses how the resulting
glottal signal can be parametrized both in time and frequency domains. The
three methods are evaluted in Section 4 through a wide systematic study
on synthetic signals. Their robustness to noise, as well as the impact of
the various factors that may affect source-tract separation, are investigated.
Section 5 presents decomposition results on a real speech database containing
various voice qualities, and shows that the glottal source estimated by the
techniques considered in this work conveys relevant information about the
phonation type. Finally Section 6 draws the conclusions of this study.
2. Glottal Source Estimation
Glottal flow estimation mainly refers to the estimation of the voiced excitation of the vocal tract. During the production of voiced sounds, the airflow
arising from the trachea causes a quasi-periodic vibration of the vocal folds
(Quatieri, 2002), organized into so-called opening/closure cycles. During the
open phase, vocal folds are progressively displaced from their initial state due
to the increasing subglottal pressure. When the elastic displacement limit
is reached, they suddenly return to this position during the so-called return
phase. Figure 1 displays the typical shape of one cycle of the glottal flow
(Fig.1(a)) and its time derivative (Fig.1(b)) according to the LiljencrantsFant (LF) model (Fant et al., 1985). It is often prefered to gather the lip
radiation effect (whose action is close to a differentiation operator) with the
glottal component, and work in this way with the glottal flow derivative on
the one hand, and with the vocal tract contribution on the other hand. It is
