Open access

Protocol

Voice disorder recognition using
machine learning: a scoping
review protocol
Rijul Gupta ‍ ‍,1 Dhanshree R Gunjawate ‍ ‍,2 Duy Duong Nguyen ‍ ‍,2
Craig Jin ‍ ‍,1 Catherine Madill ‍ ‍2

To cite: Gupta R, Gunjawate DR,
Nguyen DD, et al. Voice
disorder recognition using
machine learning: a scoping
review protocol. BMJ Open
2024;14:e076998. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2023-076998
► Prepublication history and
additional supplemental material
for this paper are available
online. To view these files,
please visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/​
bmjopen-2023-076998).

Received 22 June 2023
Accepted 10 January 2024

© Author(s) (or their
employer(s)) 2024. Re-­use
permitted under CC BY-­NC. No
commercial re-­use. See rights
and permissions. Published by
BMJ.
1

School of Electrical and
Information Engineering, The
University of Sydney Faculty of
Engineering and Information
Technologies, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia
2
Sydney School of Health
Sciences, The University of
Sydney Faculty of Medicine
and Health, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia
Correspondence to
Dr Catherine Madill;
​cate.​madill@​sydney.​edu.​au

ABSTRACT
Introduction Over the past decade, several machine
learning (ML) algorithms have been investigated to assess
their efficacy in detecting voice disorders. Literature
indicates that ML algorithms can detect voice disorders
with high accuracy. This suggests that ML has the
potential to assist clinicians in the analysis and treatment
outcome evaluation of voice disorders. However, despite
numerous research studies, none of the algorithms have
been sufficiently reliable to be used in clinical settings.
Through this review, we aim to identify critical issues that
have inhibited the use of ML algorithms in clinical settings
by identifying standard audio tasks, acoustic features,
processing algorithms and environmental factors that
affect the efficacy of those algorithms.
Methods We will search the following databases: Web
of Science, Scopus, Compendex, CINAHL, Medline, IEEE
Explore and Embase. Our search strategy has been
developed with the assistance of the university library staff
to accommodate the different syntactical requirements.
The literature search will include the period between 2013
and 2023, and will be confined to articles published in
English. We will exclude editorials, ongoing studies and
working papers. The selection, extraction and analysis of
the search data will be conducted using the ‘Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-­
Analyses extension for scoping reviews’ system. The same
system will also be used for the synthesis of the results.
Ethics and dissemination This scoping review does not
require ethics approval as the review solely consists of
peer-­reviewed publications. The findings will be presented
in peer-­reviewed publications related to voice pathology.

INTRODUCTION
Voice disorders are defined as deviations
from the voice quality, pitch and loudness
from the expected values for someone’s age,
gender and cultural background.1–3 Voice
disorders affect a significant portion of the
population, with approximately 30% of
individuals reporting having suffered from
a voice disorder at some point in their lifetime and 20% experiencing chronic issues.4
Voice disorders can range from minor vocal
discomfort to severe dysphonia and from
functional to malignant conditions.5 Voice

STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
⇒ This review focuses on the quality of the dataset, the
