Machine Learning Approaches to Vocal Register
Classification in Contemporary Male Pop Music
Alexander Kim, Prof. Charlotte Botha
Hamilton College

arXiv:2505.11378v2 [cs.SD] 20 Aug 2025

8/16/2024

Abstract

1

For singers of all experience levels, one
of the most fun and daunting challenges
in learning, technical repertoire is navigating placement and vocal register in and
around the passagio (passage between chest
voice and head voice registers). Contemporary Pop and Musical Theater solos increasingly demand strong command through and
above the first passagio, and the use of various timbre and textures to achieve a desired quality. Thus, it can be difficult to
identify what vocal register within the vocal range a singer is using even for advanced vocalists. This paper presents two
methods for classifying vocal registers in
an audio signal of male pop music through
the end-to-end analysis of textural features
of mel-spectrogram images. Additionally,
we will discuss the practical integration of
these models for vocal analysis tools, and
introduce a concurrently developed software
called AVRA which stands for Automatic
Vocal Register Analysis. Our proposed
methods achieved consistent classification
of vocal register through both Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models, which shows
promise for robust classification possibilities
across a greater range of voice types and
genre.

In all voices, there are two muscles responsible for manipulating the vocal folds.
The thyroarytenoid (TA) muscles shorten
and thicken the folds while the cricothyroid (CT) muscles lighten and lengthen. TA
dominant vocal functions result in ’chest
voice’ which the lower speech like vocal register in all genders. On the other hand, the
CT muscles produce that pop falsetto head
voice sound that has become prominent in
the 21st century, and is often used to reach
higher notes with a softer quality.

1.1

Introduction

Interpreting Mixed Voice
in Pop Music

In vocal pedagogy, ’mixed voice’ is used to
denote the coordination of both TA and
CT muscles, which imbues the sound with
qualities from both chest voice and head
voice. However, an experienced singer can
change the balance of muscle function,
so the term mixed voice covers the entire
spectrum of chest-like to head-like timbres.
For this reason, we divided the mixed voice
classification into ’mix’ and ’head mix’
where mix denotes a more TA dominant,
solid sound and head mix reflects more of
the lighter head voice qualities.
The challenge in identifying vocal register is the variety of factors involved from
person to person. In male pop music,
1

The Automatic Vocal Register Analysis (AVRA) software may help students
and experienced singers further their understanding and practice of contemporary
vocal technique. In AVRA, the user uploads an audio clips which is then processed
into a sequence of mel-spectrograms. Then
user then highlights the portion of audio
they want analyzed and the software
returns back the spectrogram with markers
and labels for vocal register shifts. The
temporal visual labeling of AVRA could
help vocalists see exactly where they might
be struggling, and what technique their
target artist is using.

navigating the passagio demands control
over mixed voice which raises the difficulty
of vocal register identification.
More
formally, the passagio is sequence of pitches
that bridge or transition between chest
and head voice. Vocal registers don’t have
clear boundaries and can overlap in pitch
particularly through the passagio. Besides
pitch, other qualities like resonance, and
placement play a role in determining the
color and texture of the sound. This is
how a singer can sing one note in two very
different ways which is reflected in their
choice of vocal register.

1.2
