Objective Dysphonia Measures in the Program Praat:
Smoothed Cepstral Peak Prominence and Acoustic
Voice Quality Index
*,†,‡Youri Maryn and §David Weenink, *Bruges, yGhent, and zAntwerp, Belgium, and xAmsterdam, The Netherlands
Summary: Purpose. A version of the ‘‘smoothed cepstral peak prominence’’ (ie, CPPS) has recently been implemented in the program Praat. The present study therefore estimated the correspondence between the original CPPS
from the program SpeechTool and Praat’s version of the CPPS. Because the CPPS is the main factor in the multivariate
Acoustic Voice Quality Index (AVQI), this study also investigated the proportional relationship between the AVQI with
the original and the second version of the CPPS.
Study Design. Comparative cohort study.
Methods. Clinical recordings of sustained vowel phonation and continuous speech from 289 subjects with various
voice disorders were analyzed with the two versions of the CPPS and the AVQI. Pearson correlation coefficients and
coefficients of determination were calculated between both CPPS-methods and between both AVQI-methods.
Results. Quasi-perfect correlations and coefficients of determination approaching hundred percent were found.
Conclusions. The findings of this study demonstrate that the outcomes of the two CPPS-methods and the two AVQImethods are highly comparable, increasing the clinical feasibility of both methods as measures of dysphonia severity.
Key Words: Smoothed cepstral peak prominence–Acoustic voice quality index–SpeechTool–Praat–Feasibility–
Accuracy.

INTRODUCTION
Acoustic methods have a long history in clinical voice assessment. Besides measures of fundamental frequency and sound
intensity to objectify pitch and loudness, respectively,
numerous acoustic markers have been proposed to objectify
dysphonia type and severity.1 Acoustic measurements are
remarkably appealing because of their noninvasiveness, relative
low cost, and ease of application.2 They are able to yield a numerical output, and therefore they consistently permit tracking
of treatment outcomes and communication of this information
to voice clinicians, patients, third-party payers, physicians, and
other stakeholders.3,4 One specific and recently developed
method to quantify the severity of overall dysphonia is the
Acoustic Voice Quality Index (AVQI).
This index has the following attributes. First, the AVQI is
developed to measure dysphonia in both continuous speech and
sustained vowel recordings. Sustained vowels induce a comparatively steady action at subglottal, glottal, and supraglottal levels.
Continuous speech, on the other hand, is characterized by
temporal and spectral variations caused by voice onsets and offsets, interruptions, voiceless phonemes, phonetic context, prosodic modulations in fundamental frequency and intensity, speech
tempo, and so on.2,5,6 Because the vocal behavior differs
considerably between these two voice/speech tasks, perception
Accepted for publication June 30, 2014.
From the *Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, SpeechLanguage Pathology, Sint-Jan General Hospital, Bruges, Belgium; yDepartment of
Speech-Language Therapy and Audiology, Faculty of Education, Health and Social
Work, University College Ghent, Ghent, Belgium; zFaculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; and the xInstitute of Phonetic Sciences,
Faculty of Humanities, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Youri Maryn, Sint-Jan General Hospital, Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology, Ruddershove 10, 8000 Bruges,
Belgium. E-mail: yourimaryn@vvl.be
Journal of Voice, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 35-43
0892-1997/$36.00
! 2015 The Voice Foundation
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jvoice.2014.06.015

of type and severity of dysphonia can be hypothesized to vary
across the kind of speech to be rated. Although two studies7,8
found no statistically significant differences in the auditory
perception of dysphonia severity between sustained vowels and
continuous speech, four other studies6,9–11 revealed that
listeners rate dysphonia, and especially breathiness, more
severely in sustained vowels than in continuous speech. These
findings underline that for perceptual and instrumental methods
in the clinical dysphonia assessment it is essential to record and
analyze sustained vowels and continuous speech. Therefore, the
AVQI requires recordings and measures overall dysphonia
severity of both speech/voice contexts.
Second, the AVQI is a multivariate construct that combines
multiple acoustic markers to yield a single number that correlates
reasonably with overall dysphonia severity. This multiparametric
approach was motivated by the multidimensional nature of voice
quality and the fact that it is not related to a sole physical variable
or a unique psychoacoustical determinant.12 This is in contrast to
pitch and loudness that many authors regard as synonymous to
the distinctive features fundamental frequency and sound intensity, respectively. Kreiman and Gerratt13 for example stated
that vocal quality included all perceptual dimensions of the spectral envelope and its changes in time, and indicated a possibly major role of both time-domain and frequency-domain measures in
the investigation of voice quality. Furthermore, bivariate correlational methods to estimate the proportional relationship between
an auditory-perceptual rating and a single acoustic marker
approach often lacked sufficient strength (see Maryn et al14 for
a meta-analysis on this topic). This prompted many researchers
to apply multivariate statistics and to combine the merits of multiple measures for increased validity of objective/instrumental
analysis of voice quality and/or more accurate discrimination
among different perceptual categories/levels of dysphonia
severity.4,9,15–26 To construct a statistical model representing
the best combination of acoustic predictors for the overall

36
degree of disordered voice, only six from the thirteen acoustic
measures that were initially applied in the study of Maryn
et al4 were retained after stepwise multiple linear regression analysis. The following multiple regression equation that was based
on the unstandardized coefficients of this statistical model was
called the AVQI ¼ 2.571 (3.295 – 0.111 smoothed cepstral
peak prominence " 0.073 harmonics-to-noise ratio " 0.213
shimmer local + 2.789 shimmer local dB " 0.032 slope of the
long-term average spectrum + 0.077 tilt of the trendline through
the long-term average spectrum). This equation thus includes
acoustic markers from the time, frequency, and quefrency domains, and is a multidimensional representation of dysphonia
severity.
Third, the main contributor to the AVQI model is the
smoothed version of the cepstral peak prominence (CPPS).
This measure represents the distance between the first rahmonic
peak and the point with equal quefrency on the regression line
through the smoothed cepstrum. The reasoning behind this
acoustic marker is that the more periodic a voice signal, the
more it displays a well-defined harmonic configuration in the
spectrum (ie, the more harmonic the spectrum), and, consequently, the more the cepstral peak will be prominent. Since
its introduction in the field of voice quality measurement by
