Laryngeal Vibratory Mechanisms: The Notion of Vocal
Register Revisited
*Bernard Roubeau, †Nathalie Henrich, and ‡Michèle Castellengo, *zParis, France and yGrenoble, France
Summary: This study, focused on the laryngeal source level, introduces the concept of laryngeal vibratory mechanism.
Human phonation is characterized by the use of four laryngeal mechanisms, labeled M0–M3, as evidenced by the electroglottographic (EGG) study of the transition phenomena between mechanisms with a population of men and women,
trained and untrained singers. Macroscopic and local descriptions of the EGG signal are analyzed during the production
of glissandos and held notes with different mechanisms. The transition from one mechanism to another of higher rank is
characterized by a jump in frequency, a reduction of EGG amplitude, and a change in the shape of the derivative of the
EGG (which may correspond to a reduction of the vibratory mass). These characteristics are used to identify a transition
between two mechanisms, in complement with acoustic spectrographic analyses. The pitches of transitions between the
two main mechanisms M1 and M2 and the range of the frequency-overlap region are described in detail. The notion of
vocal register is revisited in the light of these concepts of laryngeal mechanism. The literature on vocal registers is reviewed, and it is shown that the confusion often cited with respect to this notion may be related to the heterogeneity of
the approaches and methods used to describe the phenomena and to the multiplicity of descriptors. Therefore, the terminology of the registers is organized depending on their relation to the four laryngeal vibratory mechanisms.
Key Words: Laryngeal mechanism–Electroglottography–Larynx–Singing voice–Voice range–Register.
INTRODUCTION
Human voice production over the whole frequency range involves different adjustments of the vocal apparatus, encompassing zones called registers.1 These registers are described by
physiologists,2,3 physicians,4,5 phoneticians and voice scientists,6–11 voice teachers,12,13 and singers. Obviously such varied
workers have developed widely different interests in the voice,
and their approaches are heterogeneous. The descriptions
which have been given of these ‘‘registers’’ can be derived
from laryngoscopic,1 electrophysiological,3,5,14 acoustic,15 auditory,6,7 or proprioceptive observations. Acoustic and electrophysiological observations are very often combined.16–18 It is
evident that some observations have more to do with the way
the laryngeal source works, whereas others include the action
of the resonating cavities or the sensations characteristic of
the proprioceptive stimulations because of muscle contractions
or laryngeal vibrations. In spite of the diversity of approaches,
the terms used are similar, which brings great confusion to this
domain, confusion that is often mentioned by the authors. There
is need for a better understanding of the notion of vocal register.
In this paper, we focus on the laryngeal source level. For this
purpose, electroglottography (EGG) seems to us an appropriate
experimental technique. This noninvasive observation technique of laryngeal activity is well known and has been used
since its conception by Fabre in 195719 (see Childers and Krishnamurthy20 or Henrich et al21,22 for a detailed review of literature). The EGG signal is based on the monitored conductance
between the vocal folds. There is likely to be a good correlation
Accepted for publication October 17, 2007.
From the *Service d’ORL et de Chirurgie Cervico-faciale, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France;
yDépartement Parole et Cognition, GIPSA-lab, CNRS-INPG-UJF-UnivStendhal, Grenoble, France; and the zL.A.M.-IJLRA, CNRS-University Paris 6, Ministère de la Culture,
Paris, France.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Nathalie Henrich, Département Parole et
Cognition, GIPSA-lab, 46, Avenue Félix Viallet, 38031 Grenoble Cedex 1, France. E-mail:
nathalie.henrich@gipsa-lab.inpg.fr
Journal of Voice, Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 425-438
0892-1997/$36.00
Ó 2009 The Voice Foundation
doi:10.1016/j.jvoice.2007.10.014

between this signal and the glottal contact area in the case of
nonpathological voice phonation. Therefore, for a normal voice
it enables one to evaluate indirectly the amplitude of vocal fold
contact during successive vibratory cycles, as well as the main
phases of this contact. This exploratory technique allows a macroscopic and a microscopic study of the contact-area signal.14,21,23 The macroscopic analysis is concerned with the
overall shape of the envelope of the EGG amplitude-time waveform and its variations in amplitude and frequency.5,24,25 The
microscopic analysis pertains to the shape of the oscillation itself. Three databases (DBs) of simultaneous audio and EGG recordings of singers and nonsingers are used in Material and
Methods section. In the following section, the concept of laryngeal vibratory mechanism is introduced to describe the different
configurations that the laryngeal vibrator can take throughout
the human voice frequency range. The borders between the
mechanisms are defined by the rupture phenomena, or vibratory
discontinuities, be they audible or not, which can be detected in
a macroscopic analysis of the EGG signal. The relationship between a laryngeal mechanism and the EGG glottal-pulse shape
is discussed in the third section. Finally, the notion of vocal registers is revisited in the light of the laryngeal mechanisms. The
vocal-register literature is reviewed to point out the sources of
confusion. Then, the register terminology is organized depending on the relation of the registers to the four principal laryngeal
vibratory mechanisms.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The three databases to which we refer and which were recorded
for the purpose of previous studies are briefly presented.
Database 1 (DB1)
Nineteen subjects participated in this study: 10 male subjects
(seven trained and three untrained singers) and nine female subjects (seven trained and two untrained singers). The purpose of
this study was to analyze the shift between laryngeal mechanisms. The subjects were asked to produce ascending and

426
descending glissandos in a spontaneous way, and sustained
vowels (/a/, /o/, and /i/) with a change of laryngeal mechanism
at three different pitches (293 Hz—D4, 311 Hz—D#4, and
329 Hz—E4, respectively). Audio and EGG signals were recorded simultaneously in a soundproof room (LEM microphone, Geneva, Switzerland and Frokjaer-Jensen EG 830
electroglottograph, Copenhagen, Denmark). The fundamental
frequency was automatically extracted by an FIES-CNET melograph (Paris, France).
Database 2 (DB2)
Forty-two subjects participated in this study: 21 male subjects
(seven professional, 11 amateur, and three untrained singers)
and 21 female subjects (five professional, 10 amateur, and six
untrained subjects). The purpose of this study was to establish
a voice range profile for each laryngeal mechanism. The subject’s pitch range was covered in semitones on the vowel [a].
Sound-pressure level (SPL) was measured in dBA by a sound
level meter (1560-P General Radio, West Concord, MA) placed
at 1 m from the subject’s mouth. The recording took place in
a large, quiet studio room.
Database 3 (DB3)
Eighteen trained singers participated in this study: 12 male
singers (seven baritones, two tenors, and three counter-tenors)
and six female singers (three mezzo-sopranos and three sopranos). The purpose of this study was to explore the variations of
open quotient in western operatic singing. The database comprises several parts, in which the singers were asked to produce
glissandos, crescendos, and sustained vowels ([a], [e], and [u])
for different pitches covering their comfortable frequency
range, and at three different loudness levels. When necessary,
the singers were asked to indicate in which laryngeal mechanism they were singing. Audio and EGG signals were recorded
simultaneously in a soundproof room (1/2 in. condenser microphone (Bruël & Kjær 4165 Naerum, Denmark) placed 50 cm
from the singer’s mouth, preamplifier (Bruël & Kjær 2669),
and conditioning amplifier (Bruël & Kjær NEXUS 2690);
