Articulatory interpretation of the "singing formant"
Johan Sundberg
Department of SpeechCommunication,Royal Institute of Technology(KTH). S-100 44 Stockholm 70, Sweden
(Received 3 December 1973; revised10 January 1974)

The "singingformant" is a high spectrumenvelopepeak near 2.8 kHz
characteristicof vowel soundsproducedin male Westernopera and concert
singing.An acousticalmodel of the vocal tract is capableof generatingsuch a
peak provided that three conditionsare met: (i) The cross-sectional
area in the
pharynx must be at least six times wider than that of the larynx tube opening.If
so, the larynx tube is acousticallymismatchedwith the rest of the vocal tract,
and an extra formant is added to the vocal tract transfer function. (2) The sinus
Morgagni must be wide in relation to the rest of the larynx tube. This may tune
the frequencyof the extra formant to a value betweenthe frequenciesof the third
and fourth formantsin normal speech.(3) The sinuspiriformesmust be wide.
This reducesthe frequencyof the fifth formant to about 3 kHz. X-ray studiesof
a raised and lowered larynx showedthat these three conditionsmay be fulfilled
when the larynx is lowered.Thus, the larynx lowering,typical of male
professionalsinging,seemsto explain the "singingformant" and other formant
frequencydifferencesbetweennormal speechand male professionalsinging.

Subject Classification: 70.20; 75.70.

INTRODUCTION

"singing formant" in terms of formants only we have to
assume an extraordinary density of the higher formants.
Spectrographic measurements on various vowels in four

The "singing formant" or the "2.8 kHz" belongs to •he
acoustical characteristics of professional male singing
in Western opera and concert performances. Rather independent of vowel quality and pitch, it appears as a re-

professional bass singers yielded the average formant

frequencyvaluesgiven in Fig. 2. 4 For comparison,
mean values observed by Fant et al. in normal male

gionof highspectralenergynear 3 kHz. ' A typicalex-

speechare givenin the samefigure.s Analysesof later-

ample is given in Fig. 1, displaying a spectrum level
difference of approximately 20 dB between a spoken and

al x-ray pictures and photos of the lip opening taken during vowel phonation in speech and singing suggested ar-

a sung[u]. The spectrumenvelopepeakis frequently

ticulatory interpretations of the formant frequency differences as regards the three lowest formants: In singing as compared with speech the larynx was lowered, the
jaw opening increased, the tongue tip was advanced in
the back vowels, and the lips were excessively protruded

accompanied by an envelope minimum slightly higher in
frequency and often clearly discernible in the spectrogram.

How can such a "singing formant" be generated acoustically ? If •vo or more formants approach each other in

in front vowels. The purpose of the present paper is to
suggest an articulatory explanation for the frequencies
of the fourth and fifth formants in singing.

frequencythe formantlevels will rise. 2 In our previous
research, attempts were made to match spectra of vowels

sungby male opera singerson a formant synthesizer.a
These experiments showed that five formants below 4
kHz or even 3 kHz have to be postulated in order to generate a "singing formant" with formants only. In normal

I. ANATOMY
It can be assumed

male speech the frequency of the fifth formant lies
•round 4.5 kHz. Therefore, when we interpret the

that an acoustic

feature

such as the

"singing formant," which is rather independent of vowel
quality, stems from a region of the vocal tract that is

VOWEL [u]

SPEECH

SING NG

0

FIG. 1. Spectra of the vowel [u]
spoken (tell) and sung (right) by a
professional bass singer.

- 10
-20
