=== Recherche de mots-clés pour drugman2019 ===
--- abstract ---
Gulbahce Koyu 35430, Urla, Izmir, Turkey

Abstract
Source-tract decomposition (or glottal flow estimation) is one of the basic problems of speech processing. For this, several techniques have been
proposed in the literature. However studies comparing different approaches

--- introduction ---
January 6, 2020

1. Introduction
Speech results from filtering the glottal flow by the vocal tract cavities,
and converting the resulting velocity flow into pressure at the lips (Quatieri,

--- conclusion ---
various voice qualities, and shows that the glottal source estimated by the
techniques considered in this work conveys relevant information about the
phonation type. Finally Section 6 draws the conclusions of this study.
2. Glottal Source Estimation
Glottal flow estimation mainly refers to the estimation of the voiced excitation of the vocal tract. During the production of voiced sounds, the airflow
--
16

4.4. Conclusions on Synthetic Speech
Many factors may affect the quality of the source-tract separation. Intuitively, one can think about the time interference between minimum and
maximum-phase contributions, respectively related to the vocal tract and to
--
17

noisy conditions. Note that our results corroborate the conclusions drawn in
(Sturmel et al., 2007) where the mixed-phase deconvolution (achieved in that
study by the ZZT method) was shown to outperform other state-of-the-art
--
types, the three techniques of glottal source estimation are compared.


--- method ---
proposed in the literature. However studies comparing different approaches
are almost nonexistent. Besides, experiments have been systematically performed either on synthetic speech or on sustained vowels. In this study we
compare three of the main representative state-of-the-art methods of glottal
flow estimation: closed-phase inverse filtering, iterative and adaptive inverse
filtering, and mixed-phase decomposition. These techniques are first submitted to an objective assessment test on synthetic speech signals. Their
--
2009b), speaker recognition (Plumpe et al., 1999), emotion analysis/synthesis
(Airas and Alku, 2006), etc.
In this paper, we limit our scope to the methods which perform an estimation of the glottal source contribution directly from the speech waveform.
Although some devices such as electroglottographs or laryngographs, which
measure the impedance between the vocal folds (but not the glottal flow itself), are informative about the glottal behaviour (Henrich et al., 2004), in
--
techniques are available in the literature (Walker and Murphy, 2007). However the diversity of algorithms and the fact that the reference for the actual
glottal flow is not available often leads to the questionability about relative
effectiveness of the methods in real life applications. In most of studies,
tests are performed either on synthetic speech or on a few recorded sustained
vowels. In addition, very few comparative studies exist (such as (Sturmel
--
2


--- result ---
significant modifications in glottal feature distributions. Techniques based
on the mixed-phase decomposition and on a closed-phase inverse filtering
process turn out to give the best results on both clean synthetic and real
speech signals. On the other hand, iterative and adaptive inverse filtering is
recommended in noisy environments for its high robustness.
--

1. Introduction
Speech results from filtering the glottal flow by the vocal tract cavities,
and converting the resulting velocity flow into pressure at the lips (Quatieri,
2002). In many speech processing applications, it is important to separate the
contributions from the glottis and the vocal tract. Achieving such a sourcefilter deconvolution could lead to a distinct characterization and modeling of
--
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 the main state-of-the-art
methods for glottal source estimation are reviewed, and the three techniques
compared in this study are detailed. Section 3 discusses how the resulting
glottal signal can be parametrized both in time and frequency domains. The
three methods are evaluted in Section 4 through a wide systematic study
on synthetic signals. Their robustness to noise, as well as the impact of
the various factors that may affect source-tract separation, are investigated.

--- discussion ---
