A Comparative Study of Glottal Source Estimation
Techniques

arXiv:2001.00840v1 [cs.SD] 28 Dec 2019

Thomas Drugmana , Baris Bozkurtb , Thierry Dutoita
a

b

TCTS Lab, University of Mons, 31 Boulevard Dolez, 7000 Mons, Belgium
Department of Electrical & Electronics Engineering, Izmir Institute of Technology,
Gulbahce Koyu 35430, Urla, Izmir, Turkey

Abstract
Source-tract decomposition (or glottal flow estimation) is one of the basic problems of speech processing. For this, several techniques have been
proposed in the literature. However studies comparing different approaches
are almost nonexistent. Besides, experiments have been systematically performed either on synthetic speech or on sustained vowels. In this study we
compare three of the main representative state-of-the-art methods of glottal
flow estimation: closed-phase inverse filtering, iterative and adaptive inverse
filtering, and mixed-phase decomposition. These techniques are first submitted to an objective assessment test on synthetic speech signals. Their
sensitivity to various factors affecting the estimation quality, as well as their
robustness to noise are studied. In a second experiment, their ability to label voice quality (tensed, modal, soft) is studied on a large corpus of real
connected speech. It is shown that changes of voice quality are reflected by
significant modifications in glottal feature distributions. Techniques based
on the mixed-phase decomposition and on a closed-phase inverse filtering
process turn out to give the best results on both clean synthetic and real
speech signals. On the other hand, iterative and adaptive inverse filtering is
recommended in noisy environments for its high robustness.
Keywords:
Source-tract Separation, Glottal Flow Estimation, Inverse Filtering,
Mixed-Phase Decomposition, Voice Quality

Preprint submitted to Computer Speech and Language

January 6, 2020

1. Introduction
Speech results from filtering the glottal flow by the vocal tract cavities,
and converting the resulting velocity flow into pressure at the lips (Quatieri,
2002). In many speech processing applications, it is important to separate the
contributions from the glottis and the vocal tract. Achieving such a sourcefilter deconvolution could lead to a distinct characterization and modeling of
these two components, as well as to a better understanding of the human
phonation process. Such a decomposition is thus a preliminary condition
for the study of glottal-based vocal effects, which can be segmental (as for
vocal fry), or be controlled by speakers on a separate, supra-segmental layer
(as it is the case for the voice quality modifications mentioned in Section
5). Their dynamics is very different from that of the vocal tract contribution, and requires further investigation. Glottal source estimation is then
a fundamental problem in speech processing, finding applications in speech
synthesis (Cabral et al., 2008), voice pathology detection (Drugman et al.,
