=== Recherche de mots-clés pour henrich2006 ===
--- abstract ---
Laboratoire d’Acoustique Musicale, Paris, France

Abstract
Starting from Garcia’s definition, the historical evolution of the notion of vocal registers from then until now is considered.
Even though much research has been carried out on vocal registers since then, the notion of registers is still confused in the

--- introduction ---
Key words: Laryngeal mechanism, singing voice, vocal register

Introduction
Before the nineteenth century, knowledge about
human phonation was limited to what could be
--

From Garcia to the 1960s
As mentioned in the introduction, the singing
teacher Manuel Garcia in 1847 is considering three
main different registers, chest , falsetto-head and

--- conclusion ---
the vibratory pattern of the vocal folds and the
influence of the subglottal resonance. He came to
the conclusion that the mid register may not be
considered as a distinct register (9). The physician
Minoru Hirano, together with two voice teachers
--
shown in Figure 1.

Conclusion: what are the vocal registers?
In his time, Garcia was distinguishing vocal registers
on the basis of a ‘mechanical principle’ which he
--
singer manages to mimic the voice quality of a given
register while using an inappropriate laryngeal mechanism.
Conclusion
Since Garcia, knowledge about singing voice registers has evolved, thanks to the development of new
experimental techniques. Yet, the controversy about

--- method ---
experiments on the human voice to the French
Académie des Sciences (1), prior to the publication
of his famous singing voice method Ecole de Garcia:
Traité complet de l’art du chant (2). In this paper, he
claims that the human voice is composed of different
--
Figure 4. Illustration of vocal registers transition phenomena on a glissando sung by a counter tenor (A) with a pitch jump and a noticeable
timbre change, (B) without any noticeable break. The top panel shows the time-frequency analysis, the middle panel the EGG signal, and
the bottom panel the EGG measured open quotient. Two methods have been used to measure open quotient: on the EGG signal, using a
35% threshold method, and on the DEGG signal, using the DECOM method (55). The determination of the underlying laryngeal
mechanism (M1 or M2) is based on the EGG detected laryngeal transitions.


--- result ---
not only an interest in the voice sound quality but
also in the underlying vocal physiology mechanisms.
On November 16th, 1840, he presented the results
of his observations as a voice teacher and his
experiments on the human voice to the French
--
rationale on physiological observations of the larynx
position, he demonstrated that the falsetto and head
registers result from the same laryngeal mechanism,
their difference being a timbre effect.2
Nowadays, we have experimental techniques to
--

Detection of transition phenomena
A transition phenomenon may result from psychoacoustic properties of human perception. The ‘periodicity transition’ distinguished by Titze (18,19) is
an example of such a transition. It refers to ‘changes
in vocal quality that occur whenever glottal pulses
--
defines the pulse-chest registers boundaries on the
basis of this periodicity transition.

--- discussion ---
contre-basse , the other possible registers, such as
voix mixte , sharing similar mechanical principle
with these main ones (for a detailed discussion about
Garcia’s falsetto-head register, we refer the reader to
(3)). The frequency ranges of these registers are
--
among the voice community, and it may have
contributed to the emergence of an international
discussion. In the late 1970s, spurred on by the
Collegium Medicorum Theatri (CoMeT), an international organization composed of physicians, voice
scientists, voice coaches and voice pathologists, a
