=== Recherche de mots-clés pour nigam2000 ===
--- abstract ---
Editor: William W. Cohen

Abstract. This paper shows that the accuracy of learned text classi ers can be improved by

augmenting a small number of labeled training documents with a large pool of unlabeled documents. This is important because in many text classi cation problems obtaining training labels

--- introduction ---
Keywords: text classi cation, Expectation-Maximization, integrating supervised and unsupervised learning, combining labeled and unlabeled data, Bayesian learning

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of automatically classifying text documents. This problem
is of great practical importance given the massive volume of online text available through the World Wide Web, Internet news feeds, electronic mail, corporate
--
to modulate the degree to which EM weights the unlabeled data; in the second we
augment the model to relax one of the assumptions about the generative model.
5.3.1. Weighting the unlabeled data. As described in the introduction, a common
scenario is that few labeled documents are on hand, but many orders of magnitude
more unlabeled documents are readily available. In this case, the great majority of

--- conclusion ---
approach could apply unlabeled data to more complex classi ers.

8. Summary and Conclusions
This paper has presented a family of algorithms that address the question of when
and how unlabeled data may be used to supplement scarce labeled data, especially when learning to classify text documents. This is an important question in

--- method ---
Learning a naive Bayes text classi er consists of estimating the parameters of the
generative model by using a set of labeled training data, D = fd1 ; : : : ; djDjg. This
subsection derives a method for calculating these estimates from the training data.
The estimate of  is written ^. Naive Bayes uses the maximum a posteriori
estimate, thus nding arg max P(jD). This is the value of  that is most probable
--
5.2. Discussion

In summary, EM nds a ^ that locally maximizes the likelihood of its parameters given all the data|both the labeled and the unlabeled. It provides a method
whereby unlabeled data can augment limited labeled data and contribute to parameter estimation. An interesting empirical question is whether these higher likelihood

--
assumptions do not hold|as certainly is the case in real-world textual data|the
bene ts of unlabeled data are less clear.
Our experimental results in Section 6 show that this method can indeed dramatically improve the accuracy of a document classi er, especially when there are only
a few labeled documents. But on some data sets, when there are a lot of labeled
and a lot of unlabeled documents, this is not the case. In several experiments,
--
more unlabeled documents still overwhelm parameter estimation and thus badly
skew the estimates.

--- result ---
to convergence. This basic EM procedure works well when the data conform to the generative
assumptions of the model. However these assumptions are often violated in practice, and poor
performance can result. We present two extensions to the algorithm that improve classi cation
accuracy under these conditions: (1) a weighting factor to modulate the contribution of the
unlabeled data, and (2) the use of multiple mixture components per class. Experimental results,
obtained using text from three di erent real-world tasks, show that the use of unlabeled data
reduces classi cation error by up to 30%.
--
class of each component, the parameter estimation can be done with unlabeled data
alone.
It is important to notice that this result depends on the critical assumption that
the data indeed have been generated using the same parametric model as used in
classi cation, something that almost certainly is untrue in real-world domains such
--
unlabeled data can be useful in practice in spite of the violated assumptions. In the
following sections we address this by describing in detail a parametric generative
model for text classi cation and by presenting empirical results using this model
on real-world data.

--

--- discussion ---
If the task is to classify a test document di into a single class, then the class with
the highest posterior probability, arg maxj P(yi = cj jdi ; ^), is selected.
4.4. Discussion

Note that all four assumptions about the generation of text documents (mixture
--
which EM is hill-climbing.
Table 1 gives an outline of the basic EM algorithm from this section.
5.2. Discussion

In summary, EM nds a ^ that locally maximizes the likelihood of its parameters given all the data|both the labeled and the unlabeled. It provides a method
--
The 20 Newsgroups data set (Joachims, 1997; McCallum et al., 1998; Mitchell,
1997), collected by Ken Lang, consists of 20017 articles divided almost evenly among
20 di erent UseNet discussion groups. The task is to classify an article into the
one newsgroup (of twenty) to which it was posted. Many of the categories fall
into confusable clusters; for example, ve of them are comp.* discussion groups,
and three of them discuss religion. When words from a stoplist of common short
words are removed, there are 62258 unique words that occur more than once; other
--
