COTTON, SANDRA, D.M.A. Voice Classification and Fach: Recent, Historical and
Conflicting Systems of Voice Categorization. (2007)
Directed by Dr. Nancy Walker. 88 pp.

As developments in voice science continue to contribute to a collective body of
knowledge concerning the physiological nature of voice classification, the possibility
grows of a less-controversial means of assessing the voice type of a particular singer. A
more thorough understanding of the importance of the physiological dimensions of the
vocal instrument in pre-determining the potentials and limitations of any given
instrument will doubtless lead to more accurate voice classification in the future. Yet the
controversy of which operatic repertoire is appropriate for a given singer will continue to
haunt teachers and singers alike as long as Fach, the system of categorization of roles,
continues to be treated as a synonym of voice type.
While the body of critical and analytic texts concerning voice training grows, so,
too, does the discourse continue to develop its on-going debate as to the importance of
various criteria involved in voice classification. There exist also numerous documents
from previous centuries which may be explored for insight into historical conceptions of
voice classification. Yet as this body of literature on physiology and pedagogy continues
to grow, there remains a lack of critical writings examining the Fach system. Indeed, the
Fach system continues to be considered primarily a listing of roles organized by
appropriate voice type, though the fluid nature of the system alone is enough to question
the possibility of voice type as the true and constant categorization principle. Without
any critical studies of the system, Fach is bound to remain a controversial subject over
which pedagogues argue in vain. This paper offers a suggestion for approaching the

system from two different angles: first, from a historical perspective which will allow for
an overview of the fluidity of the system; second, with a tessitura study of a group of
roles considered all part of one Fach.

VOICE CLASSIFICATION AND FACH: RECENT, HISTORICAL
AND CONFLICTING SYSTEMS OF
VOICE CATEGORIZATION

by
Sandra Cotton

A Dissertation Submitted to
the Faculty of The Graduate School at
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Musical Arts

Greensboro
2007

Approved by

_________Dr. Nancy Walker______
Committee Chair

APPROVAL PAGE

This dissertation has been approved by the following committee of the Faculty of
The Graduate School at The University of North Carolina at Greensboro.

Committee Chair_____Nancy Walker_________________
Committee Members _____Robert Wells__________________
______James Douglass_______________
______David Holley________________

_______14 March 2007_________
Date of Acceptance by Committee

_______14 March 2007_________
Date of Final Oral Examination

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
LIST OF TABLES .......................................................................................................... iv
LIST OF FIGURES ............................................................................................................v
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................1
CHAPTER
I. CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA ..........................................................................9
Range .........................................................................................................13
Tessitura and Passaggi ..............................................................................17
Timbre .......................................................................................................23
Agility .......................................................................................................29
Chapter Summary .....................................................................................30
II. EARLIER CONCEPTS OF VOICE CLASSIFICATION .................................32
The Hiller Treatise ....................................................................................34
The Garcia Treatise ...................................................................................42
Chapter Summary .....................................................................................52
III. THE FACH SYSTEM ........................................................................................54
The Kloiber Guide .....................................................................................59
The Boldrey Guide.....................................................................................63
Role-Shifting..............................................................................................69
Chapter Summary / Conclusion .................................................................77
BIBLIOGRAPHY..............................................................................................................84

iii

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1. Passaggi and Vowel Formants ............................................................................20
Table 2. Vocal Demands for Cherubino vs. Susanna .......................................................41
Table 3. Vocal Demands for Siébel ..................................................................................50
Table 4. Vocal Demands for Stephano .............................................................................51
Table 5. Terms and Definitions from Kloiber 1973 .........................................................60
Table 6. Comparison of Fach Listings .............................................................................70
Table 7. Tessitura and Orchestration Chart ......................................................................74
Table 8. 1973 Kloiber Listings and Tessitura ...................................................................76

iv

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1. General Female Fach Designations....................................................................58

v

INTRODUCTION

To teach healthy and efficient phonation may be the primary task of a voice
teacher, yet there remain many other significant duties. Among these obligations is the
preparation of the singer to advance to the next level of education or professional work,
and it is common for voice teachers to be judged as much (if not more) by their students’
professional success than the amount of technical progress the students make while in
that studio. For the training of singers hoping to launch a career in opera, an important
part of preparation for auditions is the selection and perfection of an “audition package.”
The selection of the arias for this package depends not only on the vocal qualities and
restrictions of the singer in question, but also on current casting trends and market
expectations. To offer an aria in the package that does not fit the current conception of
that particular voice type, whether the inappropriateness of the role be pedagogically
justifiable or merely a matter of taste, is to run the risk of exclusion from invitations to
audition. Indeed, one hears directors explain that upon receiving hundreds of requests for
auditions, any aspect of the application that points to a lack of professional preparation,
such as inappropriate repertoire, offers an easy means by which to exclude those singers
who are not yet ready to be heard. This process of reducing the applicant pool to a
feasible number of singers, while frustrating to those who do not make the cut, is
necessary for companies to save time and money.

1

In order to choose appropriate repertoire for auditions, then, a teacher must be
sure not to suggest arias that are outside the expectations of a theoretical casting director.
The most effective way to avoid such a blunder (again, whether the obstacle be vocally
justifiable or not) is to be familiar with current casting trends, which are codified under
the always evolving Fach system.1 The problem with this system lies in the seemingly
inextricable conflagration of Fach and voice type. The system was indeed organized
according to voice type, yet its fluidity demands the separation of the two. Despite the
fact that Fach listings carry the titles of particular voice types, to consider Fach and voice
classification synonymous would be to allow for the possibility that voice classification,
like Fach, is dependent upon market trends.
Just as voice classification depends primarily on ease of tessitura, timbre and
agility, so too can various roles be distinguished as appropriate for various voice types
according to the demands inherent in the score. As tastes change, however, casting
trends emerge which have little to do with the actual demands of the score. Our
collective expectations of vocal timbre for the portrayal of particular characteristics
(femininity, masculinity, promiscuity, chasteness, etc.) shift, and the casting trends for
particular types of roles shift accordingly. Compounding the problem are technological
advances, which now allow opera fans to view singers at close range via DVD, making
this shift in expectations not just one of vocal timbre, but also of body type. These
demands on casting to satisfy shifting socio-cultural expectations move roles about in the
Fach listings regardless of the roles’ tessitura, agility, or orchestration demands. In order
1

The Fach System consists of a number of lists of roles according to voice category. Fach will be
defined in depth in Chapter III.

2

to successfully train and market singers in such a fluid system, it is necessary to view
Fach separately from actual voice classification. The singer, in other words, ought train
to sing as efficiently and healthily as possible, and be marketed as the Fach which holds
the most appropriate roles according to timbre and body expectations, as well as those of
tessitura and agility, even if the title of the Fach is not the same as the singers’ exact
voice classification.
Voice classification must be considered separately from Fach, for it is a
description of the capabilities and limitations of an instrument – a physiological fact akin
to, if not as easy to determine as, a person’s height or eye color. Of course, the voice
changes as it matures, and the manner in which an instrument is treated (hygiene and
technique) can alter its capabilities and limitations. Yet these alterations serve to
highlight or hinder the qualities already present in the potential of the given instrument,
not to change the instrument into another. To alter the body or strings on a violin, for
instance, would not make it a viola, nor vice versa. Continuing with this analogy, even
the loss of the upper strings of the violin would not render it a viola, though it would lose
the majority of the sounds most commonly associated with the violin. The resonating
chamber and the relationship of the size of each part to the other would remain essentially
the same despite such alterations. Even with a crack in the body or a piece of foam taped
inside the chamber, the physical relationships remain that ultimately determine what type
of a stringed instrument it is. Though the aging process and the nature of human tissue
make the vocal instrument more complex, these same guidelines for the determination of

3

instrument “type” (the size of each part and the relationships of various parts to one
another) remain generally applicable.
The manner in which the vocal instrument is measured to determine voice type
has changed over the past centuries and will continue to change as advances are made in
voice science. What years ago was primarily a question of range has become, in recent
decades, a myriad of questions including such categories as register breaks, timbre, zones
of ease of production, and the degree of agility. Today’s voice teacher must learn to
listen for and assess each criterion, and to understand the hierarchy of the various criteria
for voice classification in order to determine the nature of the instrument at hand.
Though voice classification has become more complicated and more controversial via the
importance placed on ever more categories for consideration, voice science may soon
take away from some of the controversy (if not the complexity). The amount of guesswork involved in assessing the potential of a young instrument, for example, could
someday be reduced via computer imaging technology which would be able to assess the
laryngeal physiology and resonance cavities and thereby offer the actual physiological
capabilities and limitations of the instrument while at rest, allowing for the singer’s
technique to play no role in consideration.
There are numerous sources concerning voice classification, and this study will be
restricted to the most prominent and physiologically sound books on the subject. In the
author’s opinion, the best scientific explanation of how and why any particular voice
sounds the way it does is found in Ingo Titze’s Principles of Voice Production (Iowa
City, Iowa: National Center for Voice Studies, 2000). Richard Miller has published

4

numerous books and essays dealing with the training of specific voice types, and is
arguably the most influential vocal pedagogue of our time because of his implementation
of technology in the teaching of the centuries-old Italian technique. The most apposite of
Miller’s books for this subject is Training Soprano Voices (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2000). A pioneer of the vocal-technological era, Berton Coffin made very
significant discoveries concerning vowel formants, register breaks. It will also be
necessary to draw on his Sound of Singing; Principles and Applications of Vocal
Techniques with Chromatic Vowel Chart, 2nd ed. (Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow Press,
2002). Lastly, Coffin’s most famous student, Barbara Doscher, wrote the book that
continues to serve as a basis for vocal pedagogy in universities all over the country: The
Functional Unity of the Singing Voice, 2nd ed. (Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press,
Inc., 1994). In addition to these sources, references to works by Meribeth Bunch and
James McKinney will aid in the explanation of current notions of voice classification in
Chapter I.
Following exploration of the current understanding of voice physiology, Chapter
II will consist of a close reading of two important historical documents to examine the
possibility that voice classification and terminology may have been significantly different
for earlier pedagogues. There appears to be no secondary sources for comparison of
concepts of voice classification over time for the last 150 years, so this discussion will
rely solely on primary sources.2 The two main sources will be Johann Adam Hiller’s
2

A recent book, Singing in Style; A guide to Vocal Performance Practices by Martha Elliott
(London: Yale University Press, 2006), claims to cover voice classification in various periods and regions.
Yet the promising subtitles in the table of contents of “Voice Types and Ranges” are a bit misleading.
Elliott mentions which types of voices were popular, but does not delve into what that terminology might

5

Anweisung zum musikalisch-zierlichen Gesang (Leipzig: Johann Friedrich Junius, 1780.
Reprint, Leipzig: Edition Peters, 1976), and Manuel Garcia’s treatise École de Garcia:
traité complet de l’art du chant en deux parties (Paris: Manuel Garcia, 1847. Reprint,
Geneva: Minkoff Editeur, 1985).
The two leading sources for the Fach system are by Richard Boldrey (Guide to
operatic roles & arias, Dallas, TX: Pst. Inc., 1994) and by Rudolf Kloiber (Handbuch
der Oper3). The Boldrey text is in English, and is one of the leading Fach guides for
voice teachers and singers in the United States. Kloiber’s editions, in German, are used
primarily in Germany and Austria. Though the primary concern for this study is the state
of training and marketing of young singers in the United States, it is necessary to closely
examine the German Fach System because international and American opera houses
have all been affected to some extent by this system. The discrepancies between the
American and German Fach conceptions have less to do with any disagreements

have signified. For her chapter on “The Classical Era,” for example, she writes: “The Classical period saw
the gradual decline of the castrato voice and the increased use of female sopranos and mezzo-sopranos in
opera and concert music. [. . .] Sopranos, on the other hand, were singing higher and higher, as Mozart
described in a letter on March 24, 1770. He was visiting the house of a famous soprano in Parma, and he
jotted down her after-dinner vocal feats, which soared to well above high C….” (106) Considering a role
like Königin der Nacht, it is clear that Mozart was aware of and writing for coloratura sopranos with
capabilities in this range. What is unclear, however, is whether or not the term “soprano” carried with it
any expectations of range or agility, and what those expectations might have been. It seems that Elliott
may consider this type of information to be subjective and not quantifiable, and that this is the reason she
included terminology without an attempt at defining it. In the introduction, for example, she writes: “But
the language we must use to talk about singing – in a voice lesson, at a rehearsal, or in a concert review – is
subjective and imprecise at best. Even new developments in scientific technology for vocal pedagogy may
only complicate the problem of communicating with language about something that has to do with subtle
internal sensations.” (3) The language used in the singing community to talk about singing is imprecise if
and when those who use it fail to thoroughly define and explain it. The precise definition of terminology,
upon which the pedagogical community is constantly seeking to agree, is what makes possible effective
communication about singing. It is only “subjective and imprecise at best” when no attempt at establishing
a clear and common vocabulary is made.
3
Various Editions exist. For the purpose of this study, I will focus on the 8th (1973) and 11th
(2006) editions.

6

concerning voice type or technical vocal appropriateness of repertoire than with
differences of audience preferences. Although attention to the fluid nature of the system
is given in both sources by way of introductory material to the lists of repertoire, neither
offers temporal comparisons of lists over time. In addition to these two sources, Mark
Ross Clark has just recently published a book concerning aria selection.4 The book
promises to be a valuable guide to teachers and singers in coming years, however it has
not yet had a chance to impact current practices and will therefore be referred to only
briefly. Though these sources constitute the most significant of the published repertoire
guides specifically geared towards opera roles and Fach lists, numerous sources continue
to make an appearance on the internet. Indeed, new entries have appeared on Wikipedia
since the beginning of this project, for example, concerning Fach, specific classification
terminology, and biographical information for specific singers. While some of the
internet sources may be quite useful, such as aria-database.com, none are as exhaustive
as the Kloiber and Boldrey guides, nor is it probable that they have yet had much
influence on the training of singers for the job market.
Although there exist numerous pedagogical studies concerning the anatomy and
physiology of singing, dealings with the Fach system have primarily remained in the
realm of defining terminology and role types, rather than in the analysis and implications
of such a system. Secondary studies are needed, whether they be by nature primarily
comparative or whether they delve into pedagogical implications. As long as the lack of
secondary literature on the Fach system remains, discussions are restricted to the realm of

4

Guide to the Aria Repertoire (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2007).

7

the anecdotal and arguments put forth are neither provable nor disprovable. This study
seeks not to provide a thorough analysis of the Fach system or its pedagogical
implications, but rather to draw attention to the need for such studies and for the
consideration of Fach separately from voice classification and to suggest one possible
framework for an analytical approach to the system. In order to establish a discussion of
Fach in a more quantifiable manner, tables of comparison concerning casting, tessitura,
and orchestration will provide the basis for exploration of the system in Chapter III. The
roles represented in these tables were chosen because of their prominence in today’s
conception of the canonical lyric mezzo-soprano’s repertoire. The lyric mezzo-soprano
Fach is a particularly advantageous focus for this study because although the voice type
may have been recognized for years by some pedagogues, it was not considered an actual
Fach in the leading guide until recent decades.

8

CHAPTER I
CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA

Despite a growing body of information proving voice classification to be based on
the size and density of vocal folds and the size and shape of the vocal tract, and thus
largely quantifiable, classification remains a controversial subject among singers and
pedagogues. It is possible to imagine a future, perhaps not too far off, when voice
classification will be determined by computers able to work with imagery of the folds and
tract. Ingo Titze developed a program, for example, with which exact changes to the
sound and to the interaction of various parts of the vocal instrument can be viewed as
adjustments are made to one particular component (air flow, pharyngeal shape, degree of
adduction, etc.). This program was built around the exact anatomy of one individual, but
one can imagine the possibility of software that will allow one to change the parameters
to represent other vocal instruments. Perhaps there will even come a day when we can
determine voice classification as solidly as we can determine a singer’s height and
weight. That day, however, is not yet upon us, and when it arrives, years of distrust and
heated debate are sure to follow. One recalls, for example, the stories of Berton Coffin
announcing and explaining the discoveries concerning vowel formants at a NATS
meeting. Many voice teachers were outraged at the suggestion that certain vowels are
not possible above certain pitches, and several stood up to sing examples “proving”
Coffin wrong.
9

Like the dilemma of discussing and training registers, the largest obstacle
inhibiting a more universal agreement on voice classification in general is the attention
on effect (i.e. the acoustical energy output or sound) rather than the physiology (and/or
physiological processes) of the folds and tract. To continue with the analogy of output
vs. process for registers: there is no arguing against the fact that attention to output can
and does aid many singers in finding more efficient resonance, however the different
manners in which we sense this acoustical feedback make it difficult to establish a
productive dialogue within the pedagogical community.5 For years, there have been calls
to make use of the ever-better equipment available for the observation of the laryngeal
mechanism as a means to clarify and simplify the otherwise muddled discussion. Yet the
equipment that has crept into voice studios for the integration of science and teaching
deals primarily with output.6 In the case of voice classification, this dilemma of process
vs. effect manifests itself in the problem of distinguishing actual from potential output. A
5

For a great example of this dilemma, see the discussion on Registers among the experts from the
transcripts of the 1979 Symposium for the Care of the Professional Voice. (Lawrence, Van and Bernd
Weinberg, editors. Transcripts of the Eight Symposium; Care of the Professional Voice; Part I: Physical
Factors in Voice, Vibrato, Registers; June 1979. New York: The Voice Foundation, 1980.)
6
Voce Vista, perhaps the most successful of these, developed by Donald Miller, has been used
more and more by voice teachers, and is frequently featured at NATS meetings. In his 2000 dissertation on
vocal registers, it is evident that he understands this equipment as a tool that will allow for scientific
discussion of the more tangible effect of registration shifts: “With the invention of the laryngoscope in the
mid-nineteenth century came empirical knowledge that the distinction between chest and falsetto was
located in the pattern of vibration of the vocal folds. The chest and head ‘resonances’ that singers had
associated with the two primary registers thus lost much of their explanatory power among those who
sought a scientific explanation for the question of registers. [. . . ] It was not until the second half of the
twentieth century that the complex role of the vocal tract in voice production became fully appreciated.
The availability of spectrum analysis then made it possible to follow how the resonances of the vocal tract
were affecting the individual harmonics of the voice source.” (Donald Miller, Registers in Singing;
Empirical and Systematic Studies in the Theory of the Singing Voice. Dissertation. Rijksuniversiteit
Groningen. 2000, 18.) Perhaps Miller is suggesting a new paradigm in which the filtration in the vocal
tract would be viewed as a second process – making the tract the producer of registration shifts rather than
the larynx. This is bound to be debated in the pedagogical community for years to come. The field remains
divided, but that may change as future generations of pedagogues become intimately acquainted with the
work of Ingo Titze, Donald Miller, the late Berton Coffin, and others.

10

teacher must “hear” the output as filtered by the vocal tract and affected/manipulated by
technique. In other words, the teacher must do more than know if the sound produced
falls short of potential. He/she must distinguish which parts of the vocal production in
need of improvement lie in the pharyngeal happenings and which are to be attributed to
the source. Once efficiency and freedom is found in all parts of vocal production (i.e.
actual output reaches potential output), voice classification tends to be less controversial.
One would hope that all voice teachers listen as much for potential as to actual sound,
however the degree of success that is achieved varies greatly from teacher to teacher, as
can be observed in numerous anecdotal accounts of misclassification.
The disagreements concerning voice classification lie in the criteria for
determining classification, as well as the extent to which classification should affect
training and repertoire choices. Most pedagogues will agree that range, tessitura, agility,
and timbre are or have been significant criteria for voice classification, though the extent
to which each plays a role can differ depending on the teacher. The number of books
available on training particular voice types is evidence enough that not all teachers
approach voice teaching independent of the question of classification. When training is
dependent upon voice type, the dangers of misclassification include the likelihood that
the discovery of the actual vocal potential will be further delayed. On the other end of
the spectrum, pedagogues who delay classification and focus primarily on teaching a
student simply to sing well and efficiently will fall short in preparing singers for the
marketplace if they do not ready their students for the inevitable questions about voice

11

type. While this is more of a potential hindrance for advanced singers, the question of
classification is raised at all levels of training.7
In order to facilitate a discussion of the criteria currently used in voice
classification, it is necessary to first establish what is meant by voice classification and
what the common terminology for voice types implies. The premise of voice
classification is that it is possible to divide vocal instruments into groups within which
the voices will share vocal traits and characteristics, and that the groups will differ from
one another according also to vocal traits and characteristics. Classification involves
primary and secondary groupings. The primary categories for female voice classification
are: soprano (considered highest and most common type); mezzo-soprano (considered
lower and less common than soprano); and contralto (considered lower and less common
than mezzo-soprano). These terms for primary categories have been in use for at least
two centuries, and a very general agreement exists among current pedagogues as to the

7

The assignation of repertoire to a beginning student is always complicated by the presumptions
of the larger vocal community placed on that repertoire. When a teacher gives a student a piece in a
particular key, the presumptions by both students and colleagues is that the teacher is making a statement
about that singer’s classification. Even if, in other words, a teacher is careful to hold off on classification
with beginning students, and even if that teacher explains to the student, “this does not mean you are a
soprano/mezzo/tenor/baritone,” any repertoire assigned may solicit presumptions of classification from
others. Since this is ultimately a question of each individual pedagogical philosophy, the number of voice
teachers in each camp can vary greatly from institution to institution, and there doubtlessly exist institutions
in which little to none of such unsolicited judgment takes place. Likewise, there exist institutions in which
these problems reign to the extent that teachers are continually questioned by their colleagues regarding
their repertoire choices. In The Training of Soprano Voices Richard Miller warns: “Above all, it is not the
duty of the singing teacher to attempt Fach determination in the early stages of voice instruction. After the
singer has achieved basic technical proficiency – has established vocal freedom – her voice itself will
determine the Fach. Some teachers attempt to apply the professional Germanic Fach system to North
American college-age singers as though it were the prime aspect of voice pedagogy. The early discovery
of registration events in a young female voice can be helpful in determining the eventual Fach
categorization and in avoiding initial false technical and repertoire expectations. However, trying to
determine the exact Fach for a singer of university age, female or male, mostly represents misdirected
emphasis. Only when maturity and training have arrived at professional performance levels is final Fach
determination justifiable.” (13-14)

12

meanings listed above.8 The secondary categories, considering sub-categories of the
primary groupings, developed over the last century, and are the cause of much
misunderstanding and dispute. The most common of these secondary groupings are lyric
(mostly denoting a relatively light timbre), dramatic (a darker timbre), and coloratura
(implying great agility). Each of the criteria (range, tessitura, registration events, timbre,
and agility) used to determine voice classification at both the primary and secondary
levels will be explored separately below. The secondary categories of soubrette and
character will be explored further in Chapter III, since they deal more with casting than
vocal attributes. Although these categories have only come to exist during the twentieth
century, they have become a necessity in voice classification of young singers hoping to
sing professionally and therefore a concern of voice teachers.

Range
Most pedagogues will agree that range can and often does play a role in
establishing primary voice classification, particularly in the early stages. Whether or not
it should play a role is the point of disagreement. With the most extreme voices as an
exception (the high lyric coloratura soprano and/or the contralto with a truly limited top),
the range of well-trained female singers will probably not inhibit them from singing
repertoire belonging to a few of the neighboring voice classifications. This complicates
the possibility of using range as a determinant, and it arises from the shift towards many
sub-classifications of voice that developed during the twentieth century. If range was the
8

This “general” agreement exists now, however major regional differences existed even into the
nineteenth century. As regards the term mezzo-soprano, for example, Boldrey states that “even as late as
the nineteenth century, soprano was still being used by some composers to designate any female singer,
including mezzo-sopranos.” (Boldrey, 6)

13

primary tool for classification in the nineteenth century, it was a more probable tool when
used to distinguish between two or three concepts of the female voice, as opposed to
today’s necessity of distinguishing between eight or twelve categories. Further
complicating the matter is the fact that technique can certainly inhibit the ability to realize
one’s potential range. The range in which one performs is smaller than the range in
which one vocalizes, which in turn is smaller than one’s potential range. Precisely which
part of the potential range is realized is determined by technique. Additionally, the part
of the realized range in which one performs is determined by further categories for
classification.
In the case of the mezzo-soprano, there is some evidence that, at various points in
history, this voice type has denoted sopranos with limited high ranges.9 In his National
Schools of Singing, Richard Miller states that in the French school of singing, this term
has continued to be used in such a manner.10 To some extent, the demands of the French
operatic repertoire for the lyric mezzo-soprano might be explained by the ambiguity of

9

One example of this is found in William Ashbrook’s “Opera Singers” in The Oxford Illustrated
History of Opera, 1994: “A soprano with a range short on top, [Cornélie Falcon] lost her voice irreparably
and was obliged to retire at 26, because she forced what had been a sumptuous mezzo-soprano into
tessitura too high for it.” (440) The context of the passage is in the French tendency to use classification
terminology that refers to a particular singer. A “Falcon,” then, would be a soprano with a limited top
range. Yet it is clear from this passage that mezzo-soprano is not considered a different voice type than
soprano, for Falcon is described as a soprano who forced her mezzo-soprano into an inappropriate tessitura.
This twentieth century description is full of the problems inherent to the time period it discusses: it seems
that mezzo-soprano denoted a sub-category of soprano, rather than a separate primary category. A more
detailed discussion on historical terminology follows in Chapter II.
10
“Timbre differentiation between the lyric soprano and the mezzo are of less concern in the
French School than elsewhere. If the female voice is short on top, it is taken to be a mezzo.” (Richard
Miller, National Schools of Singing; English, French, German and Italian Techniques of Singing Revisited.
Lanham, Md: Scarecrow Press, 1997, 150.)

14

the terminology itself, particularly when regarding the nineteenth-century French trouser
roles with their high tessitura, high ranges, and fioratura passages.11
If range has become less important as a criterion for voice classification, the
degree to which it remains significant varies from pedagogue to pedagogue. Titze
continues to consider range the most important variable for voice classification: “The
single most important acoustic variable for voice classification is fundamental frequency
F0. In broad terms, F0 of any sound-producing device is inversely related to its size.”12
In other words, the longer the vocal folds at rest, the smaller (lower) the frequency it
produces. Depending on the musculature, there is also a maximum level to which the
cords can be stretched while maintaining closure, which will likewise determine the
extremes of the high range. This, of course, is a description of the entire potential and
limitations of a particular instrument. On the other hand, James C. McKinney notes in
his The Diagnosis and Correction of Vocal Faults, that the only practical aspect of
classifying by range is that if a singer does not have an extensive high range, it would not
make sense to call him/herself a tenor/soprano.13 Because of the limited technique,
McKinney cautions against using range to determine the voice type of a beginning
student. (In the end, these statements do not contradict one another, since Titze is
discussing the physiological potential of the instrument, while McKinney deals with the
sounds the student is making.)

11
12

See, for example, the tessitura and orchestration chart (Table 7) in Chapter III.
Ingo Titze, Principles of Voice Production. Iowa City, Iowa: National Center for Voice Studies,

2000, 185.
13

McKinney, The Diagnosis and Correction of Vocal Faults. Nashville: Genevox Music Group,

1994, 110.

15

Doscher, a sage pedagogue who, despite having missed out on the most recent
technological and scientific advances, remains one of the most prominent influences on
today’s generation of voice teachers, regarded range as “probably the least reliable and
the most dangerous way to classify a voice.”14 Particularly in light of the great degree of
sub-classification which often takes place at early stages, Doscher’s advice rings
stubbornly simple and true:

Other than indicating whether a voice is male or female, a relatively simple
judgment to make about normal voices, range is a “sometime thing.” Particularly
in young voices, it can bob up and down like a yo-yo. A mezzo-soprano range is
common for a young soprano who has not yet found the light or head voice. [. . .]
A conclusive range is almost always a product of vocal maturity and, as such, is
of little use as a tool to classify voices during training.15

Particularly in regard to the female voice, this recalls the less complex notion of voice
classification that reigned at various points in history. For, again, descriptions of mezzosopranos seem at times to have indicated a type of soprano: female singers with limited
upper ranges. Much of the repertoire now considered for mezzo-soprano was listed
initially for soprano.16 Although today we understand soprano and mezzo-soprano to be
two legitimately different voice types, the borders between the two remain hotly debated,
and the assignation of mezzo repertoire, particularly arias, to a young soprano, which
might make sense according to the common range inhibitions described by Doscher,
provokes speculation of misclassification. If teachers were to refrain from assigning arias
until much later in the student’s vocal development, much of the controversy would
14

Doscher, The Functional Unity of the Singing Voice, 2nd ed. Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow
Press, Inc., 1994, 196.
15
Doscher, 196
16
See, in particular, the discussion on Hiller’s treatise below.

16

disappear. Yet this is not a viable solution, since the majority of young singers winning
places among the top Young Apprentice Programs in the United States today are already
quite young. In order to remain competitive and to build up their resumes and contacts,
singers must be well-versed in operatic repertoire at an early age, and prepared to sing
full roles at the time when they audition.
In her Dynamics of the Singing Voice, Meribeth Bunch states that it is “a common
misconception that singers are given various classifications such as soprano, mezzosoprano and contralto in terms of their range of pitches.”17 The singers, Bunch maintains,
will all have similar ranges and although the quality of the high notes might be better
with the soprano, the other voices would also be able to sing those notes. This is perhaps
less true for untrained than well-trained voices, and therefore a bit more ideological than
practical for the beginning singers. “Classification of voices is made chiefly according to
where the best quality of tone is located in the voice, and where the depth and ease of
sound are located within the range of pitches.”18 This shift from range to tessitura as
primary criterion, which Bunch here describes, is perhaps the most significant shift in
voice classification since the nineteenth century.

Tessitura and Passaggi
The term tessitura, which in Italian signifies a type of connection or weave, is
used both to denote a range in which a singer enjoys a sense of effortlessness of
production and to signify the range of pitches in which a piece or role lies for the
17

Meribeth Bunch, Dynamics of the Singing Voice, 4th ed. (Vienna: Springer Verlag, 1997) 74.
Bunch, 74. While looking for the best quality or depth might have some inherent pitfalls, the
notion of distinguishing a voice according to ease is common among all advocates of the use of tessitura as
a primary determinant.
18

17

majority of the time. Tessitura and range are not to be confused with one another. It is
possible, for example, for a singer to have a rather high range but for that singer’s
comfortable tessitura to be relatively low. Likewise, there are arias that do not have
particularly high notes, but in which a singer must maintain a relatively high tessitura.
Singing within an appropriate tessitura is essential for the health and longevity of any
singer.
When it comes to tessitura, the disagreement in the field tends to have less to do
with its significance for voice classification than with the question of how exactly to
determine the more comfortable zones. It is fairly safe to say that a singer has a
particular range of frequencies within which he/she can sing for prolonged periods with
relative ease, and that the exact range of frequencies which make up the tessitura for a
given singer will correlate with a predictable tessitura according to the voice type. Yet it
is also evident that at progressive stages in a singer’s training, certain zones of the voice
will become less muscularly cumbersome and therefore less fatiguing. If the degree to
which pitches are fatiguing or easy is dependent upon technique, how are we to
determine the true zones of ease at relatively early stages in the vocal training? Are they
to be determined solely by the location of the passaggi, and how are those distinguished
with certainty? Are they based on singer feed-back? To what extent does the current
technique of the singer affect both location of the passaggi and the feed-back they will
offer? The stakes are high in this debate, since the longevity of a singer can be affected if
that singer continually spends prolonged periods of time vocalizing in areas of the voice
in which the ease of production is reduced.

18

The tessitura of a single song, aria, or even a full role is relatively easy to
determine as it requires merely reference to the score: the range in which the bulk of the
notes fall can be apparent at first glance. Because each song/aria/role has a determinable
tessitura, it is possible to make judgments about which voice type would be appropriate
for it. Determining the tessitura in which a given singer ought to be singing, on the other
hand, is a more complex process and invites disagreement among pedagogues. Doscher
defines tessitura as “a certain compass in which the voice performs with special ease of
production and sound.”19 The concept of having a special sound in this part of the voice,
also mentioned in the passage above by Bunch, introduces the category of timbre, which
will be discussed below. For now, tessitura will refer primarily to the area in the voice
“with special ease of production.”20
This group of contiguous frequencies in which a singer is most comfortable is
often contingent on the exact location of the passaggi, or transition points.21 These
passaggi, in turn, are determined by the physiognomy of the given singer; in particular,
by the acoustical relationship between the fundamental pitch produced at the folds, the
natural acoustical tendencies of the vocal tract, and the vowel in need of articulation. To
some extent, the passaggi influence tessitura because these frequencies are often more
difficult to negotiate and tend therefore to cause unnecessary and unhelpful muscular
19

Doscher, 196.
The combination of tessitura and timbre and the question of the possibility of discussing the two
separately is a matter worthy of further exploration. Do we hear a special sound because we sense the ease
of production, and is this question even answerable? When asked to define what beauty is in singing, some
might respond that it is an ease or efficiency in technique. Others might describe it as a sincerity; a lack of
artificiality or of muscular interference. Perhaps the sound described here is actually the aural
interpretation on the part of the teacher of a technically less-involved (easier) production.
21
Theoretically, tessitura and passaggi are two separate criteria for voice classification. Yet while
a discussion of passaggi is possible without mentioning tessitura, a description of tessitura without
reference to passaggi is more difficult.
20

19

activity. In other words, a comfortable tessitura for a singer is usually not in or
encompassing the passaggi. Although mezzo-sopranos, for example, are generally not
comfortable with a high tessitura, they are usually more comfortable above the (upper)
passaggio than in it, and usually remarkably more comfortable below. The passaggi lie in
predictable zones according to voice type. Although it is possible to pinpoint the slightly
different passaggi for the different vowels, these transition points are generally thought of
as encompassing one to two semi-tones. Because these transition points are determined
in large part by the formants of the vowels, they vary only slightly from voice type to
voice type. Table 1 shows the location of the passaggi according to major female
category as well as the frequencies of the vowel formants.

Table 1
Passaggi22 and Vowel Formants23
Voice Type / Vowel
Soprano
Mezzo-Soprano
Contralto
[i]
[a]
[u]

Primo (Lower) Passaggio
/ First Formant Center
E-flat4
F4
G4
B3 – F4
A5 – D6
C3 – D4

Secondo (Upper) Passaggio /
Second Formant Center
F-sharp5
E5
D5
D7 – G7
D6 – G6
B5 – D6

In addition to these primary and secondary passaggi, the transition between the lower
middle and upper middle registers of the female voice also pose technical challenges for
female voices. Though many do not agree with the sub-division of the voice into so

22
23

Frequencies for passaggi from Richard Miller Training Soprano Voices, 25.
Formant frequencies converted from formant charts in Doscher, 138 and Bunch, 99.

20

many registers, it is evident that some degree of muscular manipulation and tuning
difficulties occur a fourth below the upper passaggio. In light of the fact that technique,
particularly in terms of vocal tract tuning, can affect the exact points of transition, it is
possible for a singer to find a slight shift in tessitura with improved technique.24 Yet
there are ways for a teacher to determine the true passaggi despite faulty technique
(“raspberries,” lip-buzzes, etc.), and passaggi therefore remain one of the best ways to
classify voices, particularly at the beginning stages.25
Titze does not discuss tessitura as one of the classification criteria directly, but he
acknowledges the predictably differing transition points in his discussion of Vocal
Registers:

A major unresolved issue in the study of registers is the consistency with which
involuntary register changes occur at specific fundamental frequencies. Vocalists
and listeners can often detect quantal changes in the voice when a scale or
glissando is sung and no quality changes are intended. [. . .] The question is: what
causes these register changes and why do they occur at specific fundamental
frequencies?26

Titze discusses two possible explanations for this (not mutually exclusive), and both
would make sense in terms of voice classification. The first hypothesis is that the natural
resonances of the trachea might be triggered by certain frequencies and that these
transition points might be caused by the relationship of the fundamental frequency to
24

Shifts in tessitura may also be caused by maturation of laryngeal musculature.
Doscher states, “tessitura and the careful monitoring of bridges between registers is the most
viable way to classify young voices.” (197)
26
Titze, 293-4. In his discussion of muscle strength as a secondary factor for voice classification,
Titze does mention tessitura. He states, “One criterion for voice classification may hinge on a singer’s
ability to (1) endure prolonged muscle contractions or (2) produce strong bursts of muscle contraction.”
(191) The former would be a singer capable of singing high tessitura, the latter a singer capable of singing
high notes, but not necessarily of sustaining a high tessitura.
25

21

these resonances. The second hypothesis deals with the amount of stress that can be
maintained in the thyro-arytenoid muscles without “valving-off.” In other words, the
amount of thyro-arytenoid stress that can be maintained during phonation depends on the
frequency, and it is thus necessary to change the amount of tension in order to maintain
phonation. This change in tension in trained singers has been observed as a gradual
disengagement of the thyro-arytenoid muscles as one moves from the bottom to the top of
one’s range. There are both acoustic and laryngeal shifts which take place as a singer
ascends in pitch, and those shifts differ slightly depending on the size, shape, and
viscosity of the folds and tract. Returning to the analogy of the predictable symmetry one
generally finds in body types (tall person = long feet, etc.), it is probable that the
physiological differences will be in some way predictable and thus lend themselves to
categorization (tall people vs. short people and low voices vs. high voices). Furthermore,
this physiological predictability will include the transition points, where the more
noticeable acoustic and/or laryngeal shifts will take place. And just as one can
categorically predict the place of the passaggi for a given voice category, so, too, can one
predict the zone in which a singer will be able to sing with the most ease.
If, then, we can understand the tessitura as a zone of ease determined by the
physiological make-up of the particular instrument, we are still left with the question of
how best to determine that zone. The aid of lip-buzzes and tongue trills one might
employ to determine passaggi may also shed light on these zones, for such exercises aid
in by-passing unnecessary muscle activity. Yet these zones, if greatly inhibited by
compensatory measures for negotiating the passaggi, might conceivably shift or grow to

22

encompass a wider range of frequencies as a result of training. Tessitura, then, is both
one of the most important considerations for voice classification, and one most dependent
on vocal technique.
McKinney sees tessitura as a “very valuable determinant of voice classification”
insofar as one must look beyond range. Particularly when dealing with singers with large
ranges, “the decision should be made,” he continues, “on the basis of which tessitura
proves to be more tiring. Vocal longevity bears a direct relationship to vocal comfort. If
you can sing well in two different tessituras, it is the better part of wisdom to choose the
one which is less fatiguing vocally.”27 McKinney does not explain how to determine the
more or less fatiguing tessituras, nor does he discuss passaggi as having anything to do
with them. Rather, he discusses transition points separately, as a tool that may work to
classify untrained singers who have not learned to mask those areas, as the singers with
more training tend to do.28

Timbre
By the term timbre, the color of the sound produced, as well as the “size” of the
voice is intended. 29 A dramatic voice is supposed to be both darker and “bigger” than a
lyric voice, for example. The “size” of a voice is not measurable in amplitude or
27

McKinney, 112.
McKinney, 113-114.
29
Though most current pedagogy books call for the use of a different term, volume continues to
function in our every day lives as an “objective” subjective measurement. Most will agree on whether or
not a singer is louder or quieter. Whether we use a collective subjective measurement or read amplitude,
we know that for every octave, the voice will (all else remaining same) double in amplitude. We also know
that the effective resonation (i.e. tuned resonating cavities) of tones will amplify the output of the acoustical
wave. The potential output, in terms of amplitude, depends both on the type of wave created at the source
(i.e. what the vocal folds produce) and the potential for amplitude in the resonators. Both of these are
dependent on the anatomy and physiology of the singer. Whether or not that singer achieves the potential
resonation, however, has to do with vocal technique.
28

23

decibels, but is rather a subjective aural measurement of the ability of a voice to project
over other instruments and in various settings. Timbre, therefore, is a criterion that is
also expected to prescribe the types of orchestration over which a voice might be able to
sing. A voice that has a lyric timbre, for example, would not be expected to sing over a
full brass section for any given length of time.
Although timbre is usually introduced as a criterion for sub-classification (lyric
vs. dramatic), some pedagogues rely on it to distinguish between primary categories
(soprano vs. mezzo). Even as a criterion for secondary classification, however, timbre
can be difficult to ascertain, since manipulations of the vocal tract can mask or hinder the
natural timbre of the voice. As McKinney notes,

Timbre (quality) is relied on heavily by experienced voice teachers in arriving at a
voice classification. This is the most intangible criterion used, however, because
the teacher must hear the voice as it sounds now and picture in his mental ear how
it will sound when it is fully developed. [. . . ] Many persons assume that all light,
lyric voices are high voices; this is not so, for there are lyric basses and baritones
and lyric contraltos and mezzos. [. . . ] Other pitfalls are the students who have
misclassified themselves and those who have adopted a wrong tonal image. 30

Indeed, the use of timbre to determine the classification of an immature singer or a singer
with poor vocal technique is tenuous at best. If timbre is appropriate for subclassification, it is not particularly useful for classification in the earliest stages of voice
training. Yet when range is limited with a beginning student and timbre seems to be
more tangible, classification accordingly often takes place.31
30

McKinney, 112-113.
Richard Miller’s distinction between the dramatic mezzo-soprano and the dramatic soprano, for
example, hinges on a timbre with particular character traits: “The dramatic mezzo-soprano often sings as
high as and no lower than the dramatic soprano, but her timbre displays depth and the darker colors
31

24

Doscher lists the three major properties of sound as frequency, amplitude, and
timbre. Timbre is the quality of the tone, or “that characteristic which distinguishes a
specific sound from the sounds of other voices or instruments, even though all the sounds
are of the same fundamental frequency and amplitude.”32 Amplification and timbre are
separated because amplitude is used here in its strictly scientific sense of the
measurement of the acoustical wave. “The subjective evaluation by the ear of a sound’s
amplitude is called its loudness or intensity, although there is evidence that tone quality
also has a bearing on intensity.”33 The timbre of the voice depends on the particular
frequencies (part of the spectrum of partials produced at the source) which are
emphasized through resonance. Resonance “is the relationship that exists between two
vibrating bodies and results in an increase in amplitude and a more efficient use of the
sound wave.”34 The two bodies in question, the folds at the source and the vocal tract,
differ in size, shape, and density from individual to individual. Furthermore, each
individual has the ability to alter to some extent the size and shape of the tract during
phonation. Timbre is therefore a set of options, prescribed by nature in the physiological
shape and size of the vocal tract.

associated with tragedy, intrigue, jealousy, revenge, or outright evil intention.” But if Miller seems to
suggest a rather subjective criterion here, he also notes the importance of the location of the passaggi for
distinguishing between all darker female voices: “There are authorities who make no differentiation
between the dramatic soprano and the dramatic mezzo-soprano. They regard the large mezzo-soprano
voice as a dramatic soprano with a short top range. For them, the Zwischenfachsängerin and the dramatic
mezzo-soprano are but subcategories of the dramatic soprano. This is too limited a viewpoint, because it
does not take sufficiently into account divergent timbres nor the location of registration events that
characterize categories of the female voice.” (Training Soprano Voices, 12) This interplay between the
significance of timbre and registration events is essential for proper voice classification.
32
Doscher, 92.
33
Doscher, 88.
34
Doscher, 98.

25

Doscher also notes the relative usefulness of timbre for distinguishing between
voice types, but cautions that voices are often misclassified when timbre is used to
determine primary categories:

Since timbre is so closely related to formant frequencies, it should give some
indication of the size and dimensions of the vocal tract. At the same time, timbre
is determined to a great extent by the particular method of training. [. . . ] Many a
big-voiced soprano has sung as a mezzo into her mid-twenties, only to find that
her voice was misclassified. [. . .] The sad thing about this kind of classification
by timbre alone is that the rare voices, such as the spinto soprano and the dramatic
tenor, are the ones most often misclassified. At best, their potential is never
realized; at worst, permanent vocal damage results.35

Again, when timbre is considered a tool for sub-classification, such errors are not likely,
for the question would not be whether this singer with a darker timbre is a mezzo or a
soprano, but rather, what type of a soprano she might be. These darker or “larger” voices
tend to be the cause of most disagreements, both because of their rarity and because they
complicate our notions of classification. A dramatic soprano may indeed have a range
that more closely resembles our expectations of a mezzo range than that of a soprano.
Furthermore, the passaggi may lie in between the expected passaggi for soprano and
mezzo, or they may shift during and after college, since the dramatic voices are the last to
mature.36 In other words, it may be difficult to argue the case for the classification of a
young spinto as such.

35

Doscher, 196-7.
See, for example, Richard Miller, The Structure of Singing; the Technique and the Art (New
York: Schirmer Books, 1986), 134: “location of pivotal points of register demarcation provides indications
of female vocal categories. Such pivotal points may vary somewhat within the individual voice, depending
on how lyric or how dramatic the voice.”
36

26

A possible explanation for the rarity of such voices (and, by extension, a solution
for the problems of early classification) lies in the concept of hybrid voices, proposed by
Titze. These hybrid voices are essentially voices in which the proportions of the vocal
folds to vocal tracts are not as one would predict. The rarity of these voice types,
likewise, would be analogous to the number of tall people with small feet, or vice versa.
The normal expectations (tall person = big feet) would translate into vocal expectations
as follows: for higher voices (shorter vocal folds) to have smaller vocal tracts (brighter
timbre), and for lower voices (longer folds) to have longer tracts (darker timbre). The
dramatic soprano, on the other hand, would have shorter vocal folds and a longer tract, a
lyric contralto would have longer folds and a shorter tract, etc.37
If the main problem with timbre as a classification criterion is the disagreement of
whether or not it should play a role in primary or secondary classification, the problem is
further complicated by the fact that timbre can be influenced by manipulations of the
vocal tract. These manipulations cause shifts in the resonance of the formants, and it is
therefore possible for a voice to manufacture lighter or darker sounds. There is no doubt
that these options for coloring the voice can be great tools to the expressive singer. Yet
there is wide disagreement about what the normal, or default, state of the tract should be
for singing. The approaches concerning types of shapes and level of muscular activity in
the pharynx differ greatly among teachers. For example, some teachers encourage their
students to consistently sing with an exaggerated pharyngeal space (lifted soft palate and
37

More research will have to be done before we can say whether or not the type of tissue in the
vocal folds may also differ between voice types. It is possible that the differences in timbre may be a
combination of source and filter, rather than purely filter. In other words, it is possible that the musculature
of the thyro-arytenoid is bulkier in a dramatic voice than a lyric, causing more medial contact area during
phonation.

27

lowered laryngeal position, sometimes referred to as the yawn approach), while some
teachers make it a policy never to even mention the soft palate. Some encourage an
“inner smile” for palatal lift with the unfortunate side-effect of a raised larynx. Still other
teachers approach pharyngeal space as primarily a vowel issue, and mention it always in
terms of vowel color.38 The potential problem with the first type of teacher, the argument
goes, is that this “covered” approach causes a sort of pharyngeal rigidity, locking up the
larynx (albeit usually in a low position), thus inhibiting agility and distorting the vowels.
On the other hand, the teacher who is philosophically opposed to mentioning any
pharyngeal shifts may find that tuning and optimal resonance is discovered at a slower
rate than in other studios, and the students may become quickly frustrated when they
inevitably compare their own progress to that of their peers. The teacher who uses
various vowels to discuss the pharyngeal space offers a solution that avoids the rigidity
and speeds up resonance discovery while retaining the possibility of vowel integrity. A
singer who continually explores a range of vowels throughout the majority of the range
will have a greater spectrum of options for expression and a greater flexibility in his/her
tonal self-image. When a singer is encouraged to sing everything with as much
pharyngeal space as possible, he/she will come to view shades of this one color as the
only viable options for singing.
Timbre, then, is governed both by physiological limits and tonal idea or muscular
choice. When reading Richard Miller’s criteria for distinguishing between the sub38

The yawn-approach will encourage a darker timbre; the inner-smile with a raised larynx will
cause a brighter timbre and less ring due since the epi-laryngeal tube will tend not to achieve the proper
ratio necessary for such resonance; the vowel-oriented approach will vary in color according to vowel; and
the teacher who avoids pharyngeal manipulation will tend to have students who only slowly move away
from the tonal images with which they entered the studio.

28

categories of the soprano voice, it seems inevitable that this category of timbre be
ultimately the most controversial: “Subtle difference in categories of the soprano voice
are based on variations in physiognomy, laryngeal size, shape of the resonator tract,
points in the musical scale where register events occur, and personal imaging.”39 Indeed,
up until “personal imagining,” the list contained items governed by the shape and size of
the instrument. “Personal imaging,” or “tonal ideals,” as McKinney might put it, are
governed by the tastes of the student and the philosophies of the teacher.

Agility
Perhaps the least controversial of all criteria is that of agility. Although most
pedagogues will agree that all voices can and should be able to execute fioratura passages
with relative ease, it is evident that some voices are simply endowed with a greater ability
to execute those passages. Some think of this as muscle coordination, but the speed with
which muscles will respond (and with which nerve signals can be sent) may be
predetermined. There was at least one attempt of which the author is aware to develop an
imaging technique for the determination of the exact muscle fibers in the intrinsic
laryngeal musculature. If and when such an attempt succeeds and it becomes possible to
determine muscle type without a physical biopsy, it will be intriguing to explore the
differences in muscle fibers between voice types. If one takes the muscular differences
between a marathon runner and a sprinter as an analogy, it is possible to imagine that,
likewise, the muscle fibers in the coloratura soprano will differ from that of the dramatic
soprano in the predominance of high-twitch vs. low-twitch muscle fibers. In the
39

Miller, Training Soprano Voices, 3.

29

meantime, one can only speculate as to the extent to which the types of fibers determine
the ease with which a particular singer negotiates fioratura passages. Although one hears
speculation among some vocologists as to the differences in thyro-arytenoid muscles, it is
likely that the cryco-thyroid and cryco-arytenoid musculature also plays a large role in
agility.
As a secondary criterion, agility helps determine the type of
soprano/mezzo/contralto a singer is. Because of the great number of sopranos, agility is
often one of two distinguishing categories for soprano voices, such as lyric coloratura
soprano or dramatic coloratura soprano. Since the lower voices are less common, subclassification of those voices is often more theoretical than practical, and lyric mezzosopranos are therefore expected to sing the repertoire for coloratura mezzo-sopranos.40
Secondary categories of contraltos are not generally seen outside of the Fach guides.

Chapter Summary
Although these various criteria are hotly debated among pedagogues as to the
degree to which they determine voice classification, it is evident that each criterion is
taken into consideration at some level. Range is useful primarily in terms of potential
boundaries for the voice and is considered less and less viable as a criterion for
classification. Timbre is often used to distinguish between primary voice categories
(soprano, mezzo-soprano, contralto, etc.), however it is more properly used to determine
the secondary categories of lyric and dramatic voices. Tessitura is probably the most
important consideration for healthy training and the singer’s longevity, though
40

More on this in Chapter III.

30

improvement of vocal technique can make previously uncomfortable zones more
comfortable. The passaggi are easier to pinpoint with certainty than the proper tessitura
for a singer, and are equally as informative for both primary and secondary classification.
Because of our ability to pinpoint these transition points, they have become a favorite
tool for the justification of both primary and secondary classification. Agility is the least
controversial of criteria, clearly denoting whether or not a singer belongs in the
subcategory of coloratura. Though we still have some time before we are able to measure
voice classification with certainty, it is essential to understand that voice type is a
physiologically determined fact and not a matter of taste. Each of these criteria may, in
the near future, be measurable through computer imaging. The implications for vocal
pedagogy are great, for it will be clear what the actual potential of a given instrument is,
and the controversy will shift from how to determine voice type to how to realize that
potential.

31

CHAPTER II
EARLIER CONCEPTS OF VOICE CLASSIFICATION

Voice classification at present is different than when much of today’s canonical
literature was composed. Putting current categories and notions into historical context
achieves two important ends: first, one may better understand the present system when
viewed together with previous notions of classification (i.e. the genesis of various
categories, the pros and cons of the system, and to what degree categories are
scientifically justifiable); second, one can make sense of historical role assignation and
descriptions of historical singers if one does not attempt to place current notions of
terminology on those roles or singers. Just as it is difficult to make statements about
classification with which all current pedagogues will agree, it is perhaps even more
complicated to make statements that would have been true for an entire era, or even an
entire region at a given time. Since treatises exist by some of the more influential
teachers of particular times and regions, however, it is possible to gain insight as to what
these teachers considered the possible types of the female voice to have been. The
treatises examined below were selected because of the prominence of the treaty as such
and for regional and temporal interest in terms of today’s canonical repertoire. The first
treatise to be examined was chosen because of the proximity to Mozart and the genesis of
one of the prototypical trouser roles, Cherubino. The role of Cherubino serves well as a
starting point because the bulk of the current canonical trouser roles (written for female

32

singers, not castrati) were composed afterwards, many of them in the mold of Cherubino.
The other treatise to be examined closely was selected because its author was one of the
most important nineteenth-century pedagogues and because of temporal and geographical
proximity to the creation of a number of popular French trouser roles, such as Siébel and
Stefano. These roles will also be examined in Chapter III in the context of the Fach
system.
Although speculation on physiology and voice type clearly existed in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, writings on the matter did not exist to the same
extent that they did for instrument performance. In his chapter on baroque vocal music
and Faustina Burdoni, George Buelow attributes this both to the many developments in
the instruments of the time and to the particularly personal interaction between vocal
student and vocal instructor.41 As Buelow also identifies, few voice teachers, past or
present, have the inclination or ability to fully articulate in print their understandings of
how to sing.42 The increase over the years in publications on vocal pedagogy can be
attributed both to continuing scientific research and an increase in the possibilities for
publication (full book, chapter in a book, article in a print or on-line journal, paper at a

41

“With the exception of various guides to vocal music . . ., most of our knowledge of Baroque
performance comes from various sources related to instrumental music. This is the result, at least in part,
of the prodigious output of practical guides and treatises attempting to keep abreast of rapidly advancing
developments in instrumental construction and performing techniques as well as an outgrowth of the
surging demand for instrumental music in the eighteenth century. Singing, the very foundation of music
since the beginnings of Western civilization, did not require new techniques to be explained nor had the
vocal mechanism changed. Consequently, there was little need for instruction manuals for singers.
Furthermore, the study of singing then, as in previous centuries and down to our own time, required the
most personal relationship between student and teacher and a pedagogical method of demonstration and
limitation.” George J. Buelow, “A Lesson in Operatic Performance Practice,” in A Musical Offering;
Essays in Honor of Martin Bernstein, Edward H. Clinkscale and Claire Brook, editors (New York:
Pendragon Press, 1977), 80.
42
Buelow 1977, 80-81.

33

conference, etc.). The seeming lack of publications that dealt with voice classification in
the eighteenth century certainly has much to do with this, but it may also point to a
conception of voice classification that was remarkably less important in the training of
singers than we believe it to be today. In addition to the possibility that classification
played little to no role in the training of singers, it is also intriguing to consider the
possibility that the basic three types upon which pedagogues today seem to agree
(soprano, mezzo-soprano, contralto) were not the concepts with which earlier pedagogues
worked. Specifically concerning the classification of the mezzo-soprano, this category
seems to have been non-existent for many before the late eighteenth century.43

The Hiller Treatise
In 1780, six years before the premiere of Le nozze di Figaro, a significant treatise
was published in Leipzig concerning the state of vocal technique in Germany: Anweisung
zum musikalisch-zierlichen Gesange. The author, Johann Adam Hiller (1728-1804),
composer, conductor and musician, was particularly concerned about the lack of
possibilities for secular vocal training in Germany.44 By the time this treatise was

43

The term simply does not appear in numerous writings. One example is found in a significant
dictionary of music for England up to the Classical period, An Early Music Dictionary; Musical Terms
from British Sources, 1500-1740 by Graham Strahle (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995), in
which there is no entry for mezzo-soprano and alto was still a voice above the cantus firmus.
44
“Immer noch haben die Italiäner, wenn nicht in andern Theilen der Musik, doch gewiß im
Gesange den Vorzug vor uns, und dürfen ihn auch wohl noch lange behalten. Die Ursache ist: Sie haben
das, was den Deutschen fehlt, Ermunterung und Gelegenheit zu studiren [sic].”The Italians still have, if not
in other types of music, an advantage over us in singing, and they may just hold on to that for quite some
time. The reason is: they have that which the Germans are missing – encouragement and opportunity to
study. All Hiller excerpts are from a reprint of the original 1780 treatise. Johann Adam Hiller, Anweisung
zum musikalisch-zierlichen Gesange (Direction for musically delicate Singing, Leipzig: Edition Peters,
1976) IV. All translations, unless otherwise noted, are the author’s. Outside the singing world, Hiller is
perhaps better known for his 1754 essay Abhandlung über die Nachahmung der Natur in der Musik
(Treatise on the Imitation of Nature in Music).

34

published, Hiller was known both for his writings on music and as conductor of the most
prominent concert house in Leipzig: the Gewandhaus. He played flute and sang bass in
the large concert organization, the Grosse Concert-Gesellschaft, in Leipzig for years
before becoming director of that organization in 1763.45 Soon after landing the
directorship, Hiller founded a singing school in Leipzig and made steps towards the
establishment of a German opera. The singing school quickly grew, and notably took on
both boys and girls.46 He founded a new society (Musikübende Gesellschaft) to replace
the Grosse Concert-Gesellschaft, and in this new society, the newly trained generation of
musicians worked together to continue to develop Leipzig’s musical culture. His
influence on the musical scene in Leipzig, in other words, was exerted both on the
education of young musicians and, afterwards, on their performing careers.
Although he did not address questions of classification directly in this treatise,
Hiller described a prominent singer of the time for each of three female voice types,
thereby offering the reader some insight into the concepts of female voice classification.
The singers he commented on were discussed in the 1774 treatise by Giovanni Battista
Mancini and are therefore not of the generation of singers performing in the 1780s and
1790s.47 The important information for this discussion, however, is in Hiller’s

45

Anna Abert Amalie and Thomas Bauman, “Hiller, Johann Adam,” Grove Music Online, ed.
Laura Macy, http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
46
Abert and Bauman.
47
In her dissertation, Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Vocal Style and Technique, Sally
Sanford describes the German school of the eighteenth century as based on the Italian school. Hiller’s brief
treatise is essentially a call to create a more Italianate approach to singing, and begs the question of how
close or different the two approaches were in practice. While Hiller deals primarily with the Mancini
treatise, Sanford views Pierfrancesco Tosi’s Opinioni de Cantori Antiche e Moderni as “the single most
influential vocal treatise of the eighteenth century.” (Sanford Dissertation. Stanford University, 1979, 2) In
addition to Tosi, Mancini and Hiller, Sanford makes frequent reference to Quantz, who was the first,
according to an entry in New Grove, to use the term mezzo-soprano in print. [Owen Jander, “Mezzo-

35

description of these voices, not the date at which he heard them. The first female singer
Hiller described in any detail is Vittoria Tesi Tramontini (1700-1775):48

Die Tesi war von der Natur mit einer männlich starken Contraltstimme begabt.
Im Jahre 1719 sang sie zu Dreßden mehrentheils solche Arien, als man für
Bassisten zu setzen pflegt. Jetzo aber, im Jahre 1725, wo sie zu Neapel in der
Oper sang, hatte sie, über das Prächtige und Ernsthafte, auch eine angenehme
Schmeichelen im Singen angenommen. Der Umfang ihrer Stimme war
außerordentlich weitläufig. Hoch oder tief zu singen machte ihr bendes keine
Mühe. Viele Passagien waren eben nicht ihr Werk. Durch die Action aber die
Zuschauer einzunehmen, schien sie gebohren zu seyn, absonderlich in
Mannsrollen, als welche sie, zu ihrem Vortheile, fast am natürlichsten ausführte.49

Since Tesi had no difficulties singing high or low, it seems that the classification of
contralto was, at least in this case, not determined solely by range, a significant point to
consider. For if range was not the primary factor in classification, it seems (based on this
description) that either timbre or the perception of strength/power might have been. The
singer seems to have avoided fioratura, which means she probably did not have a
particularly agile (coloratura voice). The strong and manly descriptive terms hint at
either a voice that we would today consider a contralto (a very capable one with no
difficulties accessing the upper register) or perhaps a dramatic voice (contralto, mezzo or
soprano). It is clear that her acting abilities were strong, and that she excelled at trouser
Soprano; Terminology, early usage, voice types,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy,
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).]
48
Gerhard Croll does not describe her voice in the same manner, though he does call her a
contralto. Gerhard Croll, “Tesi, Vittoria,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy,
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
49
Tesi was, by nature, gifted with a strong, manly contralto voice. In the year 1719, she sang
often such arias in Dresden as one normally sets for Basses. However, in the year 1725, when she sang in
Neapal in the opera, she had, in addition to brilliance and seriousness, also taken on a type of pleasant
coerciveness in her singing. Her voice spanned an extraordinarily large range. It was no bother to sing
high or low. She was not particularly great at lots of fioratura passages. But to attract the audience
through action seems to be what she was born for, especially playing trouser roles, which she, to her
credit, executed almost the most naturally. (Hiller 1780/1976, XXII-XXIII)

36

roles. In many ways, this description is intriguing because it seems to take the sexual
ambiguity inherent in a trouser role and extend it to other repertoire (arias normally for
basses), indeed also to the quality of the voice itself (manly). For this study, it will
suffice to note that one of the very successful portrayers of trouser roles was uninhibited
by range, avoided fioratura, was a great actress, and had a “manly, strong, contralto
voice.”
The next singer Hiller described, Faustina Bordoni (1697-1781), is known to
vocal pedagogues as one of the first singers to have been called a mezzo-soprano in
print.50 She was one of the most famous female singers of her time. In his description of
her voice, the adjectives Hiller employed suggest that there may indeed have been some
timbre expectations attached to voice classification (“not too bright, but penetrating”).51
While Tesi was said to have been uninhibited by range, Faustina was apparently not able
to sing above the staff (G5), a significant piece of information in its suggestion that range
might, in the case of the mezzo-soprano, have played a role in classification. Faustina

50

Owen Jander, “Mezzo-Soprano; Terminology, early usage, voice types,” Grove Music Online,
ed. Laura Macy, http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
51
“Die Faustina hatte eine zwar nicht allzuhelle, doch aber durchdringende Mezzosopranstimme,
deren Umfang sich, im Jahre 1727, da sie in London sang, vom ungestreichenen b nicht viel über das
zwengestrichene g erstreckte, nach der Zeit aber sich noch mit ein Paar Tönen in der Tiefe vermehrt hat. . .
. Die Passagien mochten laufend oder springend gesetzt seyn, oder aus vielen geschwinden Noten auf
einem Tone nacheinander bestehen, so wußte sie solche, in der möglichsten Geschwindigkeit, so geschickt
heraus zu stoßen, als sie immer auf einem Instrumente vorgetragen werden können.” Faustina had a
penetrating, but not too bright, mezzo-soprano voice, which spanned, in the year 1727 when she sang in
London, from b not much above g’’, although she later developed a couple more lower tones. . . Fioratura
passages could be runs or leaps, or made of lots of quick notes after one another on one tone, she knew
how, in the quickest possible execution, to put those tones out in such a gifted manner that one could ever
achieve on an instrument. (Hiller1780/1976, XXIII)

37

excelled at fioratura passages, and would today have probably been considered to
possess a coloratura voice.52
The only other female voice Hiller described in detail is that of Francesca
Cuzzoni (1696-1778), a “pleasant and bright soprano” voice with the range we would
today expect of the lyric soprano (C4 to C6).53 The only additional information Hiller
offered concerning this voice was that she had good intonation and a lovely trill.
Unfortunately, there is not enough in this treatise to draw any firm conclusions as to the
extent to which range determined voice classification. Since the mezzo-soprano
description does not have as much a lower as a more limited range than that of the
soprano, it is indeed possible that mezzo-soprano referred to a soprano with a limited
range, rather than a voice lower than soprano. The fact that only three female voices are
described, each with a different term for classification, points to Hiller having understood
these three as the main voice types. Yet there remains a chance that Hiller discussed
these three with this terminology only in response to Mancini’s treatise.
Hiller likewise discussed register in terms of the Mancini document. He wrote
that Mancini was not correct about the borders of the female voice:

Der größte Theil ihrer Stimme ist entweder Brust- oder Kompfstimme; mit der
erstern läßt sich mehr in der Tiefe, und mit der andern mehr in der Höhe
ausrichten. Daher ist es nichts ungewöhnliches Fraeunzimmerstimmen zu finden,
die bis ins dreygestrichene f oder g reichen. Daß dieß aber ein so
52

There is no explanation regarding the limited range, and therefore no way of knowing what type
of coloratura voice it was. Even the coloratura contralto is expected to sing at least a fourth higher than
Faustina reportedly did.
53
“Die Cuzzoni hatte eine sehr angenehme und helle Sopranstimme, eine reine Intonation und
schönen Trille. Der Umfang ihrer Stimme erstreckte sich vom eingestrichenen c bis ins dreygestrickene c.”
Cuzzoni had a really pleasant and bright/light soprano voice, a pure intonation and lovely trills. The range
of her voice stretched from c’ at least to c’’’. (Hiller 1780/1976, XXIV)

38

beneidenswürdiger Vorzug sey, der die Nacheiferung aller andern verdiene,
mochte ich nicht gesagt haben, zumal wenn diese Sängerinnen aus Unwissenheit
oder Nachläßigkeit versäumt haben, ihre tiefen Töne durch die Bruststimme zu
verstärken und zu vermehren.54

It is evident in this passage that Hiller knew of voices that expanded well above
Cuzzoni’s range, but it seems he thought the bottom of the range of such singers was
simply not properly trained if it was weak or nonexistent. Indeed, Hiller seems to have
attributed larger ranges more to diligence than to physiological determinants.55 Range
may have played a part in the classification of soprano as opposed to contralto, though
Hiller’s description of the contralto’s range does not offer any clues about the border of
the higher range. Instead, we have the description of Tesi’s voice as manly and strong,
while Cuzzoni’s is pleasant and bright/light, adjectives denoting timbre that fit in with
our current notions of classification.
If Hiller does not offer a clear answer as to whether or not he considered mezzosoprano a sub-category of soprano, one of his predecessors did. An earlier but significant
eighteenth-century German writing on the subject is in the Anleitung zur Singkunst by

54
The bulk of their voice is either chest or head voice; the former reaches more in to the depths,
and the other more in the upper tones. Therefore it is not uncommon to find ladies who can reach f’’’ or
g’’’. I do not want to say that this is an advantage worthy of inspiring jealousy in others, however,
especially if these singers do not strengthen and expand the lower tones through the chest voice, whether
because they do not know any better or out of laziness. (Hiller 1780/1976, 7).
55
“. . . Man kann den Umfang der Stimme erweitern: aber nicht auf einmal, und in einem Tage,
sondern nach und nach. Man singe anfänglich nur immer in dem kleinen Umfange der Stimme, in
welchem man die Töne mit Leichtigkeit, hell und rein heraus bringen kann, und wenn es auch nur 8 oder 10
Töne seyn sollten; man setze von Woche zu Woche, oder lieber von Monat zu Monat einen Ton in der
Höhe und Tiefe hinzu, und sey versichert, daß man in einem halben Jahre einen Umfang von 18 bis 20
Tönen in seiner Gewalt haben werde . . .” . . .One can expand the range of the voice: but not all at once and
in one day, but rather gradually. One sings only in the small range of the voice at the beginning, in which
one can produce the tones with ease, brightly and purely, even if it is only 8 or 10 tones; each week, or,
preferably, each month, one adds a tone on the top and the bottom, and be assured that in a half year the
range will be 18 to 20 tones strong . . . (Hiller 1780/1976, 8)

39

Johann Friedrich Agricola, published in 1757.56 Just as Hiller was responding to a
significant Italian treatise, so, too, was Agricola responding to a treatise by the Italian
castrato Pier Francesco Tosi.57 Agricola viewed the female voice as being either soprano
or alto, and considered the mezzo-soprano to be a sub-category of soprano: “. . . let us
examine the various voice types by range. The principal types are soprano, alto, tenor,
bass; and the most common middle classifications: low soprano and low tenor
(baritone).”58 Agricola cites evidence given by scientists as to the physiological
differences (mainly judging by the size of the trachea) of the different voice types. If, as
Lucie Manén asserts, the bel canto approach to singing had as a premise that voice types
were merely particular timbres and that all singers can be trained to sing all of the voice
types (either female or male, of course), then Agricola departs most definitely from that
school in his insistence that range determines voice type and that, furthermore, range is a
physiological fact, not a technical or stylistic effect. 59
To piece together some of this information in terms of today’s canonical
repertoire, one can examine the role of Cherubino. Cherubino is listed as a soprano in the
original score, yet it is often sung today by mezzos. The role of Cherubino does not
contain any particular difficulties for a trained female singer.60 The arias together span
only an octave and a half (C4 – G5) and there is no fioratura work. The orchestration is
56

All excerpts here are taken from Julianne C. Baird’s translation, Introduction to the Art of
Singing (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
57
Baird/Agricola 1995, 40
58
Baird/Agricola 1995, 71
59
Lucie Manén, Bel Canto; The Teaching of the Classical Italian Song-Schools, its Decline and
Restoration (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), 69-70.
60
The tessitura of the arias, particularly Non so piú, is somewhat high for lower female voice
types. However, the role of Cherubino is small enough that this would not necessarily make it inaccessible
for contraltos or dramatic mezzo-sopranos.

40

light (mainly strings) and the form of the arias calls for little to no ornamentation. The
tessitura of all female roles in Mozart tends to be in the upper passaggio, and Cherubino
is no different in that respect.61 Table 2 below illustrates the range and tessitura of the
two Cherubino arias, an example of the recitative which precedes Non so più, in which
both Susanna and Cherubino sing, and Susanna’s first aria.

Table 2
Vocal Demands for Cherubino vs. Susanna62
Character / Scene
Cherubino / Recitative, 64-67
Susanna / Recitative, 64-67
Cherubino / Aria Non so più, 68-74
Cherubino / Aria Voi, che sapete, 140-144
Susanna / Aria Venite, inginocchiatevi, 148-154

RANGE
G4 – F5
E4 – E5
E(-flat) 4 – G5
C4 – F5
D4 - G5

TESSITURA
B4 – D5
A4 – C5
B(-flat) 4
A4-D5
B4 - D5

One can see at a glance that the music for Susanna and Cherubino in this recitative is
essentially in the same range, though Cherubino’s music is slightly higher. (Susanna
does sing higher at other points in the opera, but her music is essentially more demanding
in every sense – she sings higher, lower, more often, and she has some fioratura
passages. The tessitura in Susanna’s first aria, for example, is similar to that of Voi, che
sapete, and that the range differs only by one step.) In terms of what type of voice might
61

Boldrey sees Mozart roles as belonging still to the time in which singers were expected to be
able to sing pretty much anything, and views the growth of the “modern orchestra” as the cause for a need
to distinguish between the heavier and lighter voice types. (Boldrey, 6-7) Though today we deem certain
Mozart roles appropriate only for particular voice types (Susanna as a soubrette or lyric soprano, the
Countess as a heavier soprano, etc.), it is easy to view that as a question of taste in timbre relationships
when viewed in the context of historical casting traditions.
62
From the Shirmer piano reduction, Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus. Le nozze di Figaro (The
Marriage of Figaro); An Opera in Four Acts; Libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte (Milwaukee, WI: G. Schirmer,
Inc., 1951).

41

have sung Cherubino based on the Hiller descriptions of the contralto, mezzo-soprano,
and soprano in this treatise, only the mezzo-soprano is doubtful because of the repeated
G5-s in the arias. Hiller’s description of the contralto is of a singer/actress that would
have been perfect for this part. There is nothing in the description of the soprano that
would make the role of Cherubino inappropriate, although the few low notes in Voi, che
sapete are at the bottom of the noted range. Those notes, however, are more jokes than
melody, dipping down to demonstrate Cherubino’s fiery soul and depth of desire, and
often sung with a purposefully dramatic shift in timbre. It seems, then, that a role that has
come to define the lyric mezzo-soprano voice type would have been least appropriate for
the singer defined in this treatise as a mezzo-soprano.

The Garcia Treatise
Aside from Cherubino and the Strauss roles, the bulk of the trouser roles
(composed for female singers) that make up today’s lyric mezzo-soprano’s repertoire are
from nineteenth-century France. These roles are often rather high for a mezzo-soprano
and tend to demand some fioratura work. Many of these roles were premiered by
sopranos, and at various points in the last century they have belonged to various soprano
Fächer.63 Luckily, one of the most prominent nineteenth-century French voice teachers
and researchers, Manuel Garcia, left a detailed account of his understanding of the voice,
including voice classification and registers. His comments on the female voice in general
will be examined below, followed by an exploration of how this information sheds light

63

See Table 6 in Chapter III.

42

on appropriate voices for two of the more popular French trouser roles from this time:
Siébel from Gounod’s Faust and Stefano from his Roméo et Juliette.
Le Traité complet de l’art du chant is an important document for several reasons:
first, it records the thoughts of one of the most important and influential teachers of the
mid and late nineteenth century (Manuel Garcia); second, it retains much from a
prominent singer and teacher from the previous generation (his father); third, it shows in
great detail the author’s understanding of voice classification. 64 The author of this
treatise, Manuel Garcia (1805-1906), grew up around singers and vocal instruction. His
father, the senior Manuel Garcia (1775-1832), was a renowned tenor, and a favorite of
Rossini.65 For this study, it is also significant to note that the elder Garcia was the voice
teacher for his daughter Viardot-Garcia (1821-1910), one of the most important middlevoiced female singers of the nineteenth century. 66 Although (the younger) Manuel
Garcia’s singing career was brief in comparison to his sister’s and father’s careers, his
contribution to future generations is great because of this treatise, his research on the
voice, and, particularly, the invention of the laryngoscope. 67 Garcia married the bel
canto tradition of systematic development of a linking of all vowels in all registers with

64

The Complete Treatise on the Art of Singing - All references here are taken from a reprint of the
1847 edition, published by Minkoff, 1985, with an introduction by L.J. Rondeleux.
65
“Le père Garcia (Manuel del Popolo Vicente) (1775-1832) était l’un des plus grands ténors de
sa génération. Il était le ténor préféré de Rossini qui écrivit en particulier pour lui le rôle du Comte
Almaviva dans son Barbiere di Siviglia.” Garcia’s father . . . was one of the greatest tenors of his
generation. He was the preferred tenor of Rossini, who wrote for him the role of Count Almaviva in his
Barber of Seville. (Rondeleux in the introduction to the 1985 Minkoff reproduction of the 1847 treaty)
66
Apropos of this paper, Viardot-Garcia is listed as a French mezzo-soprano in the article in the
opera version of Grove Music Online (April Fitzlyon, “Pauline Viardot,” Accessed April 28), but simply as
a singer (i.e., without classification) in the article from the main Grove Music Online (Beatrix Borchard,
“Pauline Viardot,” Accessed April 28).
67
April Fitzlyon, “Garcia, Manuel,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy,
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).

43

the latest scientific information available.68 In fact, much of our (current American)
conception of the bel canto training comes from the still popular book of vocalises and
notes by one of Garcia’s most famous students, Matilda Marchesi.69
Because the passaggi are currently understood to be dependent upon voice type,
the discussion of registers and transition points found in Garcia’s treatise can help
illuminate his understanding of voice classification. Garcia understood a register to be a
group of “consecutive and homogenous” pitches that all have the same nature or sound,
and that differ in these attributes to those of the other registers because a different
mechanical production is necessary for each register.70 One of the foremost purposes of
voice study, for Garcia and for various schools of voice instruction, is the development of
these registers in such a way as to mask their separateness. For the female voice, Garcia

68

“Ce livre est un témoignage extrêment précieux de ce que Garcia pére reçut et transmit de la
tradition italienne, c’est-à-dire fondamentalement des écoles de castrat où s’inventérent, aux XVII et XVIII
siécles, une pédagogie, une manière de travailler la voix et un certain art du chant qui sont à la source de
toute la tradition occidentale…” The book is an extremely precise expression of what Garcia, the father,
transmitted from his Italian tradition, that is to say the fundamentals of the school of the castrati or the
manifestation of it in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, a pedagogy, a way of working with the voice
and a certain type of singing which is at the root of all of the western traditions . . . (Rondeleux,
introduction to treatise) The bel canto approach was notable in its systematic approach to unifying the
sounds both of various vowels in a particular register and of the sonority of the registers with one another.
Garcia used science (both acoustic evidence and physiological discoveries) to speak specifically to the
reasoning behind this approach and to point out any discrepancies he thought might be in need of
addressing. As is the case in his treatise, vocal treatises tended to be mostly notation of exercises, and
Garcia was one of the first to use a mostly scientific articulation of what the goals of these exercises were
and why that was the case.
69
Marchesi taught many professional singers of the next generation, but her lasting fame certainly
lies in this collection. Many current teachers begin each lesson “with Marchesi.” Jenny Lind also studied
with Garcia. Though Swedish, Lind was an important figure in the history of the American opera singer
and also in her great influence on generations of performers and composers to come.
70
“Par le mot registre, nous entendons un série de sons consécutifs et homogènes allant du grave à
l’aigu, produits par le développement du même principe mécanique, et don’t la nature diffère
essentiellement d’une autre série de sons également consécutifs et homogènes, produits par un autre
prinicipe mécanique.” By the term register, we mean a series of consecutive and homogenous sounds
going from low to high that are produced via the same mechanical principal, and which essentially differ
from another series of consecutive and homogenous sounds that are produced by a different mechanical
principal. (Garcia 1847/1985, 6)

44

wrote that the lowest register is the chest voice (Voix de poitrine) and that it is essentially
the fundamental part of the female voice as it is for the male and child voices. According
to Garcia, the “ordinary” female voice would have a chest register which does not exceed
G3 – G4 , surrounding the primo passaggio. Exceptional voices may extend both higher
and lower than this (E-flat3 – C5 ).71 Tellingly, Garcia wrote that some contraltos cannot
sing above this register and that the second passaggio is the upper limit of their voices.
Today, there is no category for a female voice that has the upper passaggio as its limit
and likewise no belief that the chest register alone would be sufficient or tasteful for the
entire range of any female voice in classical training. The “mixed” voice is now
generally accepted (if the terminology remains hotly disputed) as necessary for all female
voice types between the passaggi, and utilization of this type of production might have
enabled those “contraltos” to find their upper registers. Most significant in his discussion
of the registers of the female voice is that although he allowed for the possibility for the
borders of the register to sometimes be a half tone higher or lower, he did not state that
these depended on the voice type.72
Although Garcia later separated the types of female voices, the section on timbre,
which follows that of register, consists of a description of the various qualities of the
sound of each register, without assertion that the color in each register differs for diverse
voice types. There are two main causes for vocal timbre, he states:

71

Garcia 1847/1985, 7
In his later chapter on classification, there is some difference in the lower register shift, but not
in the higher one.
72

45

1º les conditions fixes qui caractérisent chaque individu, telles que la forme, le
volume, la consistance, l’état de santé ou de maladie de l’appareil vocal de
chacun; 2º les conditions mobiles, telles que la direction que prend le son dans le
tuyau vocal pendant son émission, soit par le nez, soit par la bouche; la
conformation et le degré de capacité de ce même tuyau, le degré de tension de ses
parois, l’action des constricteurs. . .73

A modern reading of this might consider the first cause to be the physiology of the
instrument itself and the second to be what we understand as vocal technique. (Volume
here would have more to do with tissue type and viscosity than loudness.) Perhaps the
most intriguing part of Garcia’s discussion of timbre is the limiting of terminology of
color to clair or sombre. The clear tones are described as quite brilliant, while the murky
ones are round. They were both said to be effective in the chest register, and Garcia
intuited that certain tones are more successful with a shift in color (essentially what we
would call vowel modification today).74 In some singers, Garcia wrote, the use of the
sombre color in the head register brought a drastic change in timbre: “Le timbre sombre
a sur quelques voix de tête un effet des plus remarquables; il rend ce registre pur et
limpide comme les sons d’un harmonica.”75 This sounds like a description of a loss of
overtones due to improper tract tuning. Again, it is puzzling that Garcia would limit the
73

First, the set conditions which characterize every individual, those of manner, those of volume,
those of the consistence, of the health or sickness of the vocal apparatus of the individual; second, the
mobile conditions, which depend on the direction the sound takes through the pharynx, be it through the
nose, through the mouth; the conformation and the degree of the capacity of the same flute, the degree of
tension in its pharyngeal walls, the action of its constrictors. . . (Garcia 1847/1985, 8) This is one of the
passages that astounds a modern reader in its instinctual knowledge – we know now for sure that the degree
of rigidity of the pharyngeal wall is one of the biggest choices a singer has for vocal timbre, and that it can
give the impression of an incorrect voice type. Garcia even recognized that the constrictor muscles could
be activated to falsify a different voice type. For the modern reader, manner must have been agility, and
volume was probably about timbre.
74
In the falsetto register, he wrote, both colors are less effective than in the chest register (falsetto
was a weaker register, in his view).
75
The covered timbre in the upper head voice produces a very remarkable effect; it reminds one
of the pure and limpid register like that of the sounds of a harmonica. (Garcia 1847/1985, 9)

46

terminology for timbre discussion to two terms. Garcia’s description is also complicated
by the fact that he made no distinction here between the voice types. If by “some voices”
he meant some male voices, then we understand it to be a type of cover; a backward
and/or rounding vowel modification of the vowels to help negotiate the passaggio. This
move towards a back or round vowel in the male passaggio can indeed help tuning. If,
however, he includes women in this, this type of vowel modification might interfere with
vowel tuning and cause the singer to sound out of tune. If the singers happened to have
truly dark voices (i.e. anatomically-determined), perhaps Garcia did not yet have a
category that allowed him to recognize those voices as having inherently darker timbres
and he thus misinterpreted the type of sound produced in the upper register as further
darkened. For the purposes of this study, it is important to recognize that Garcia seems
not to have differentiated between voice types based on timbre.
Garcia’s chapter on the classification of voices, “Classification des voix
cultivées,” begins with the female voice:

La voix de la femme, plus belle et plus souple que celle de l’homme, est,
par excellence, l’interprète de la mélodie.
L’étendue, la force, le caractère des voix de femees, varient suivant la
conformation des individus; on les a rangées d’après ces considérations en trois
classes:
Les contralti, qui occupent le bas de l’étendue;
Les mezzi-soprani, qui en occupent le milieu, une tierce audessus des
premiers;
Les soprani, qui sont placés au sommet, une tierce au-dessus des mezzisoprani.76
76

The female voice, more beautiful and more supple than that of the man, is the archetypal
interpreter of the melody. The ability to stretch/sweep, the strength, the character of the female voice
varies among the individual; one may consider the ranges of these in three categories: the contraltos, who
occupy the bass of the range; the mezzo-sopranos, who occupy the middle, a third above the [contralti]; the
sopranos, who are placed at the summit, a third above the mezzo-sopranos. Garcia 1847/1985, 20

47

It is evident here that, unlike current classification with its emphasis on timbre, tessitura,
and passaggi above range, it was indeed the range which was of primary consideration
for Garcia. These voices today would, indeed, sing in different ranges, and the
description of each being a third apart from its neighboring voice type makes perfect
sense. Yet this is, according to today’s pedagogues, primarily a question of comfortable
tessitura and not actual range. There is no evidence that Garcia used criteria other than
range for voice classification.
Of the individual female voice types, Garcia wrote the following: the contralto
voice is manly and energetic in the chest voice, the register in which it is most
distinctive.77 This register was unrecognized or neglected for the most part, he wrote,
especially in France. The contralto voice was not well-understood, and Garcia seems to
have comprehended that to expect this voice type to behave like a different one would
have been ineffective, if not damaging.78 Regarding tessitura, Garcia did state that the
upper register is fatiguing for the contralto if she is asked to sustain it for a prolonged
period of time.79

77

Garcia 1847/1985, 20
“Les sons indiqués en caractères plus fins dans cet exemple se produisent avec peine et sont
dangereux à essayer; peu de personnes ont l’organe assez docile pour les former, et le jugement assesz sûr
pour ne les placer qu’à propos. Il serait imprudent de prétendre les obtenir malgré la nature. . .” The tones
indicated at the end of this example are produced with effort and are dangerous to carry out; few people
have a docile enough organ for such formation, and enough judgment to place it where appropriate. It
would be imprudent to aspire to obtain it contrary to nature… (Garcia 1847/1985, 20)
79
“Ce dernier registre est très fatigant pour les contralti; on n’en doit aborder les sons qu’en les
effleurant dans les traits. Tous les chants qui s’y fixeraient d’une manière soutenue deviendraient
inexécutables.” The last register is quite tiring for the contralti; one must address/penetrate the sounds that
are more on the periphery of these traits. All of the songs that focus on this one manner will become
inexcutible. (Garcia 1847/1985, 21)
78

48

The mezzo-soprano is a voice that can sing fairly evenly throughout the three
registers (here from A3 to A5 ), and that is all Garcia has to say about the voice.80 This is
perhaps the most remarkable part of his section on voice classification, for most current
definitions of the mezzo-soprano voice pivot on it also having a relatively darker timbre
than that of the soprano. Yet the differences between the soprano and the mezzosoprano, according to Garcia, are not that of color, but rather, in addition to this slight
difference in range, that the soprano is weak in the lower register and powerful in the top,
while the mezzo-soprano can sing evenly throughout the registers.81 Garcia’s distinctions
sound today like the distinction between a lyric mezzo-soprano and a lyric coloratura
soprano. Indeed, a dramatic soprano, for example, would not fit in the description of
soprano because the bottom register would not be weak. Likewise, the dramatic soprano
who is fatigued by sustaining high tessitura might fit his definition of contralto. The bulk
of our understanding in terms of the classification and sub-classification of the female
voice, in other words, does not line up with Garcia’s. This fact will serve to be important
when/if justification for role assignation to certain Fächer is backed up by historical
practices.
The role of Siébel is similar in many ways to the role of Cherubino. Both arias
are quite simple in tune and form, though the Siébel arias differ from one another in
range and tessitura (see Table 3). Siébel’s first aria has a range and tessitura like

80

Garcia 1847/1985, 21
“Les voix de soprano brillent principalement par la facilité, la spontanéité du dernier registre.
Ces voix sont brillantes, déliées, éclatantes; leur puissance est dans les sons élevés; elles sont faibles dans le
bas.” The voice of the soprano shines above all in its facility, the spontaneity of the highest register. These
voices are bright, delicate, shimmery; their ability is within the upper register; they are weak in the bass.
(Garcia 1847/1985, 21)
81

49

Cherubino’s, but the second aria is lower in range and tessitura than anything Cherubino
sings.

Table 3
Vocal Demands For Siébel82
Character / Scene
Siébel / Aria Faites-lui mes aveux, 104-106
Siébel / Recitative leaving flowers, 110-111
Siébel / Romance Si le bonheur, 190-91

RANGE
D4 – G5
D4 – B-flat5
C-sharp4 - E5

TESSITURA
A4 - D5
N/A
G4 - B4

Indeed, this second aria would be comfortable for any mezzo-soprano or contralto. The
recitative Siébel sings after the first aria, on the other hand, is quite high, and expands the
range in which the character sings in the opera to almost two octaves. Based on the
information explored in Garcia’s treatise, the role of Siébel would be appropriate only for
a soprano. Although both arias do not require the singer to exit Garcia’s boundaries for
the mezzo-soprano, there is more than one B-flat4 in the recitative following the flower
aria. Though the music in Siébel’s arias is orchestrated with a thicker texture than that of
Cherubino, the orchestration remains relatively light and the part is feasible for a lyric
voice type.
The character of Stephano in Gounod’s Roméo et Juliette is another beloved and
typical example of a nineteenth-century French trouser role. Though many directors
include Stephano in additional staging, the character really only makes an appearance in
the middle of the opera for a charming aria and that makes up almost the entirety of the
82

From the Schirmer piano reduction, Gounod, Charles. Faust; Opera in Four Acts (Milwaukee,
WI: G. Schirmer, Inc., n.d.).

50

role. The ensemble singing for which Stephano is noted has him doubling the first
soprano line. The aria, however, is both higher in range and tessitura than the first
soprano part of the ensemble:

Table 4
Vocal Demands For Stephano83
Character / Scene
Stephano / Recitative and Aria Que fais-tu,
blanche tourterelle, 135-140
Stephano/ Act III Finale, 141-180

RANGE
F4 – C6

TESSITURA
F4 - F5

D-flat4 – A-flat5

(F4 - C5)

The form of the aria is simple, and aside from a little vocal flourish at the end, it does not
demand much agility. The range and tessitura of the role would be particularly
appropriate for Garcia’s description of the soprano voice, with a high C and no demands
in the lower register. Indeed, the tessitura and range of the role make it ideal for the
current notion of a soprano, though the brevity of the role makes it possible for other
voice types to sing it without much risk to their longevity. Garcia’s description of the
mezzo-soprano voice would make it a highly unlikely candidate for this role, since the
top of the range exceeds the mezzo boundaries. The contralto, with the main strength in
the lowest registers, would be highly improbable according to Garcia’s description. The
soprano voice, then would be the only voice likely to perform the role of Stephano - one
of the staples of today’s lyric mezzo-soprano repertoire.

83

From the Schirmer piano reduction, Gounod, Charles Romeo and Juliet; Opera in Five Acts
(Milwaukee, WI: G. Schirmer, Inc., n.d.).

51

Chapter Summary
Voice classification today is different than it was at various points in history.
While the female voice is currently widely recognized to be properly thought of in three
main primary categories (soprano, mezzo-soprano, and contralto), it is a mistake to
assume that a singer who was described any number of years ago as having a certain
voice type would have had the attributes we associate with that type today. Range seems
to have been the primary criterion for categorization for Garcia, for example, with timbre
ascribed more as a set of options for singing than a characteristic for distinction. With
Hiller, on the other hand, it seems that timbre may have been one of the most important
characteristics for distinguishing between contralto and soprano. Furthermore, Hiller’s
description of the mezzo-soprano seems to support the notion that the term might have
meant “soprano with a limited high range.” Any discussion of historical role assignation
must take this into account – particularly when such historical information is used to
justify current casting or repertoire assignation. In other words, to say that a role was
written for a mezzo-soprano is meaningless if the role was composed two centuries ago
and there is no understanding of how the term was used then as opposed to its current
usage.
Together, an understanding of voice classification and a bit of historical context
can begin to explain shifts in role assignation in opera. It is not necessary to explore the
historical context of each role separately, but rather to have enough information to begin
to see the categories and terminology as always shifting. Historical context can further
illuminate those aspects in current practice which are scientifically justifiable and those

52

which exist as a matter of taste or tradition. The great amount of sub-division in current
voice classification, for example, has perhaps less to do with advances in voice science
and pedagogy than it has to do with the extreme diversity one finds in the vocal demands
of opera beginning in the mid-nineteenth century. By the twentieth century, when opera
houses were programming Händel, Wagner, Mozart, Strauss and Verdi all in the same
season, it became evident that the three categories of the female voice were insufficient
for both the categorization of particular roles and the singers who excelled in them. Thus
the need for additional sub-categorization of roles in opera spurred both the development
of the Fach system and interest in the vocal characteristics which determine such
secondary characterization.

53

CHAPTER III
THE FACH SYSTEM

Any discussion of the Fach system must begin with a thorough definition of
terms. Indeed, the system itself is essentially a group of expressions (dramatic soprano,
lyric tenor, etc.) with specific definitions (range, timbre, appropriate roles, etc.). The
disparities between systems tend to revolve around disagreements concerning the
terminology or the exact definitions attached to those terms. The comparison of such
definitions and of role assignation in this chapter will provide an illustration of Fach as a
group of concepts which change over time or differ from region to region. The lyric
mezzo-soprano Fach will serve as a focal point for this comparative study for two
reasons: the diverse demands of the current repertoire and, linked to this, the fact that
many of the roles which constitute the Fach today were earlier considered more
appropriate for other voice types.84 Specific roles to be examined were selected primarily
because of their popularity as audition/competition repertoire or their prominence in the
opera world. Some of the roles listed, particularly those from the Händel operas, are
more commonly performed in Europe than in the United States. Yet today’s most
popular opera singers perform both here and abroad, and these roles thus also appear on
the biographies of the most popular American lyric mezzo-sopranos, such as Susan

84

No attempt was made to offer an exhaustive list of the canonical lyric mezzo-soprano repertoire.
For more exhaustive lists, the author refers the reader directly to the Kloiber and Boldrey guides.

54

Graham, Jennifer Larmore and Susanne Mentzer.85 Although many of the trouser roles
that were originally performed by castrati are today performed by counter-tenors, the
casting of mezzo-sopranos in these roles continues at many houses and the most popular
of such roles are therefore considered in the comparison tables.
The first term in need of exploration is the term Fach (Fächer, pl.). The German
word Fach has as its two most common meanings drawer and (academic) subject. Fach
terminology is specific to a particular field; a Fachschaft is a professional association; the
adjective fachlich means specialist or technical. Even with only these few examples, one
can sense a general connotation of something (whether it be as concrete as a desk drawer
or as tentative as a field of knowledge) that is contained within boundaries. Fach, in
other words, denotes category and implies restrictions or boundaries. In the world of
opera, Fach describes a certain voice category and the roles sung by that type. The Fach
system was codified during the great boom of unions in Germany in the early twentieth
century as a way to protect singers. Since the repertoire singers were asked to perform
began to include ever more diversity in terms of the demands of orchestration, tessitura
and range, so, too, did the amount of repertoire that was inappropriate for a given singer
continue to increase. In order to create a method by which singers would not be asked to
sing roles which might be harmful to their longevity, lists were created of groups of roles
with similar vocal demands. Each group/list comprised a certain Fach, and singers began
to sign contracts which denoted their Fach. The opera house could then ask them to sing
anything on the list under that particular category, but were required to list separately on
85

Larmore has been billed under various voice types, but the bulk of the repertoire she performs is
listed in the Fach guides as lyric mezzo-soprano repertoire.

55

the contract any roles which fell outside of that Fach. In this manner, singers were not
surprised by role assignation after the contract had already been signed.86
The remaining terms in need of clarification are those which are more specific
and which may differ depending on the system in question. It is necessary, therefore, to
list the definitions separately according to the source. The three sources explored below
offer a glimpse into historical shifts (two editions of the same guide, thirty years apart)
and regional differences (German vs. American).87 Just as there is no universal
agreement on voice classification, there also exists no such agreement on the Fach
system. The guides used here were selected because of their prominence as the leading
guides in their respective regions.
To a large extent, the general definitions from source to source are in agreement.
Whereas the conception of four main categories of voice (soprano, contralto, tenor, bass)
may have reigned at various points in history, the six-category model (soprano, mezzosoprano, contralto, tenor, baritone, bass) has been more popular among pedagogues of
late and scientific advances have justified such divisions. This latter model allows for a
high, medium, and low category for male and female singers. Interestingly, the Grove
Music Online entry for Fach cites a combination of these two conceptions, allowing for

86

The lists were affected to a large extent by the roles which particular singers were comfortable
performing. In other words, lists reflected both casting practices and individual instrument capabilities. To
what extent the same pedagogical concerns which drive voice classification also play a role, in any given
moment, in the Fach listings is questionable. It is difficult to argue that a certain role is inappropriate for a
particular Fach when one of the most famous portrayers of that role was best described under the Fach in
question (i.e. “well, Singer X sang that role…”).
87
The specific Kloiber editions were selected because their span of the most recent three decades
highlights shifts in casting practices which have occurred during the careers of the latest generations of
opera singers.

56

the category of baritone but offering no middle-voiced category for female.88 This more
than highlights the discrepancies between conceptions of the middle-voiced female, it
offers evidence that there still exist those who do not consider mezzo-soprano to be a
primary category of the female voice. It may be that the larger performing range of the
female singer makes misconceptions of the limitations of the voice more likely.
Whatever the reason for this entry, the wide-spread agreement found among today’s
leading pedagogues justifies the consideration of a three-category female voice model.
From lowest to highest, then, the main female categories are contralto, mezzo-soprano,
and soprano. Within each category, there may be the sub-division of lyric to dramatic
(denoting lighter to darker timbre), or the sub-title coloratura (denoting great agility).
Figure 1 shows the various levels of Fach designation, following the low-to-high and
dark-to-bright criteria shown:

88

“The main categories (soprano, contralto, tenor, baritone, bass) each have their own
subdivisions, so that the more dramatic type of soprano, for example, may be said to lie within any one of
three Fächer: the jugendliche dramatische Sopran, the Zwischenfachsängerin (or ‘in-between type’) and
the hochdramatische Sopran (the ‘high’ or ‘serious’ dramatic soprano, as opposed to the first type, the
‘youthful’ and therefore lighter type).” J.B. Steane, “Fach,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy,
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed November 30, 2006).

57

Figure 1
General Female Fach Designations
Lower …………………………………………………………… Higher
Darker …………………………………………………………………………………… Brighter
Female

Contralto

(Dramtaic)

(Lyric)

MezzoSoprano

(Coloratura)

Dramatic

Lyric

Soprano

(Coloratura)

Dramatic

Lyric
(Full – Light)

Coloratura

Because the soprano voice is more common and more roles exist for it, there tend to be
further divisions in practice of that voice type. The parenthetical categories above are
less common, but are in use in systems of greater divisions. The general agreement, as
one can see, coincides with a general agreement in terms of voice classification. Indeed,
the categories for Fach and voice classification generally carry the same descriptive
terminology when vocal attributes are described, though the Fach definitions will not
revolve around such technicalities as location of transition points. Again, although the
terminology for voice classification and Fach is often identical, Fach is primarily
concerned with role assignation while voice classification seeks to describe the
physiological nature of a particular instrument. The most controversial points in the Fach

58

system center around the roles belonging to each Fach, and, often, the roles deemed
inappropriate for a particular Fach.89
Because it has only recently been published, Mark Ross Clark’s Guide to the Aria
Repertoire was not included in the following tables and commentary, though it will likely
become a primary resource for American teachers and singers in the future. The book is
particularly intriguing, however, in its structure, for it is not built on the concept of three
primary female voice types. Rather, the primary female categories are limited to two:
soprano and mezzo-soprano. Contralto is listed as a sub-category, or, in Clark’s terms, a
Fach of the mezzo-soprano “voice.” In other words, Clark seems to favor the four-voice
model rather than the six-voice model, with the significant modification of the lower
female voice as a mezzo-soprano rather than a contralto.

The Kloiber Guide
The most important guide for Fach is Rudolf Kloiber’s Handbuch der Oper. 90
This has been the primary guide in Germany and Europe for decades, and it continues to
be edited and re-released to reflect changes in casting and repertoire. The organization of
the guide is such that the bulk of the book consists of plot and historical descriptions of
various operas. A list of voice types follows with descriptions of the vocal characteristics
expected of each type. Following this list are two separate sections of role listings; the

89

In fact, The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Opera makes no mention whatsoever of voice type in
its entry for Fach: “The term used, strictly in Germany and more loosely internationally, to describe the
range of roles that a singer may be expected to perform.” John Warrack and Ewan West. Oxford
Unvierstiy Press, 1996. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. Duke University. 30
November 2006 <http://www.oxfordreference.com>
90
The Fach guide by Rudolf Kloiber (found in the dtv Handbuch der Oper) has been used for
decades since its first publication in 1951 by Germans and, to a lesser extent, by other European houses.

59

first arranged by voice category and the second by opera. The initial criterion by which
Kloiber divided roles, as he explains in the section introducing voice types, hinges on
whether or not the character is serious or comic. For the serious categories, his
definitions include descriptions of vocal range, agility, timbre, volume, and ability to
penetrate:

Table 5
Terms and Definitions from Kloiber 1973 (pp 758-760 – translations mine)
SERIOUS FÄCHER
Lyric (high) soprano
Young dramatic
soprano
Dramatic coloratura
soprano
Dramatic soprano
Highly dramatic
soprano
Dramatic mezzosoprano

Dramatic contralto

Low contralto

Range of C4 - C6
Soft (weich) voice with a beautiful melting quality; noble lines
Range of C4 – C6
Lyric soprano voice with a greater volume which can also create
dramatic high-points
Range of C4 - F6
Agile voice with great heights; dramatic ability to penetrate
Range of B3 - C6
A metallic voice with great volume; great ability to penetrate
Range of G3 - C6
Large, heavy, and expansive voice with well-developed middle
and low registers
Range of G3 – B-flat5 or C6
Agile, metallic “zwischenfach” voice of a dark color, which
often develops later into the highly dramatic Fach; good high
notes
Range of G3 – B5
Agile, metallic voice with well developed high and low ranges;
dramatic ability to penetrate
Range of F3 – A5
Full, dense voice with great depths

The comic roles include some of these criteria in their descriptions, but they also mention
acting abilities and appearance:

60

(Table 5 continued)

COMIC FÄCHER
Lyric coloratura
soprano
Soubrette
Character soprano
Spielalt (lyric mezzosoprano)

Range of C4 - F6
Very agile, soft voice with a great high range
Range of C4 - C6
Delicate, supple voice; a dainty appearance; skillful actress
Range of B3 - C6
Zwischenfach voice; nice ability to portray characters
Range of G3 - B-flat5
Flexible voice capable of characterization; skillful actress

The female voice categories for Kloiber, then, are essentially subdivisions of soprano,
mezzo-soprano and contralto. When reading German terms, one moves from most
specific descriptive terminology to the most general as one reads from left to right. In
other words, the word to the left is considered a sub-category of the word to the right. A
dramatic coloratura soprano, for example, would be a soprano with great agility and a
timbre which, in Kloiber’s words, has a great ability to penetrate. With the exception of
low contralto, all non-soprano voices in this system are expected to be agile even though
the Fächer do not include the sub-classification of coloratura in the titles. Again, the
reasons for this are most likely that the lower voice types are less common than the
higher types and are therefore divided into fewer categories in practice.
In the 1973 edition of the guide, there is a listing for dramatic mezzo-soprano,
but lyric mezzo-soprano is listed in parenthesis after Spielalt (a character contralto
designation). Notice also that there is no lyric mezzo-soprano or lyric contralto category
for the serious roles. Furthermore, Kloiber’s listing for dramatic mezzo-soprano states
that this voice is essentially an “in between” designation which often develops into a

61

dramatic voice with maturity. (In other words, there really is no mezzo-soprano in the
end.) The term Zwischenfach arises here and elsewhere, and is always in need of
clarification. The literal translation, between Fach, would make the term applicable to
any voice that seemed to share characteristics of neighboring categories. Kloiber,
however, used the term to specifically denote a type of dramatic voice, or the range
between a lyric and a “Helden” –Fach.91 In America, we often use this term to denote a
singer who might be either a soprano or a mezzo-soprano. Boldrey’s listing of the term
Zwischenfach, for example, acknowledges the literal meaning of a voice type that “cannot
be classified precisely in one Fach or another,” yet notes that “it is commonly understood
to refer to that shadowland between soprano and mezzo-soprano.”92
Kloiber’s initial list of Fächer does not change between the 1973 and 2004
editions, however the assignation of roles to specific voice types and vice versa which
follows does change to update the guide to reflect more recent casting habits and the new
categories of coloratura mezzo-soprano, lyric mezzo-soprano (as a separate category
from Spielalt), and lyric contralto.93 This means that these (by Kloiber) only recently
recognized categories are comprised of roles previously appropriated to other Fächer. As
illustrated in the section on role-shifting below, one Fach may indeed include roles

91

Kloiber explained in his prose and with the aid of a small diagram that the Zwischenfach
category is simply the dramatic category. Yet in his listing of Fächer, he included the categories of young
dramatic soprano, dramatic soprano, and highly dramatic soprano. To some extent, his listings of exact
Fächer complicates the notion he so simply set forth in the preceding prose. It is likely the editors decided
to leave some sections of the guide and update others, causing some confusion with the seeming
contradiction. For this study, however, the contradictions offer also clarification as evidence of a system
always in flux.
92
Boldrey, 25.
93
Kloiber, 2003/4, 903-905.

62

previously deemed the territory of such seemingly disparate Fächer as coloratura soprano
and contralto.

The Boldrey Guide
The main American source in recent years for Fach descriptions and role
assignation has been the Guide to Operatic Roles & Arias by Richard Boldrey. Boldrey
offers significantly more subdivisions of voice types than Kloiber, but he cautions that
singers need not consider themselves as belonging only to one category:

Like books, voices and roles do not always fit comfortably into just one category.
Consequently, some pedagogues and singers dispute the value of voice categories.
They argue that voice categories keep them from “crossing the line” and singing
whatever their voices are capable of singing. But voice categories are not meant
to constrain singers (most singers easily fit into two or even three neighboring
categories). On the contrary, they are meant to guide a voice toward appropriate
repertoire, to help guard it from going off in several directions at once.94

Perhaps the great degree of sub-division found in the Boldrey guide is a response to the
immense amount of repertoire available and sensitivity to all of the criteria involved in
voice classification and their myriad combinations.95 Even though this guide states as a
premise that singers may sing repertoire from more than one category, singers tend to shy

94

Boldrey, 6.
Indeed, Boldrey lists more criteria for consideration in both voice classification and role
determination than mentioned thus far. For classification, for example, he considers registration and
passaggi to be independent categories, separate from tessitura, and for flexibility to be an independent
category from agility. His description of flexibility is intriguing, for it essentially describes the ability to
employ various colors and dynamics and to vary them with ease. In other words, what one might otherwise
consider artistry or craft (fully independent of classification) is, for Boldrey, a criterion for classification.
As for Boldrey’s description of categorization of roles, he seems to have considered a great deal of criteria
beyond basic tessitura and orchestration. (See especially Boldrey, 9-11)
95

63

away from considering themselves to belong to more than one category for fear that the
casting directors might assume they are confused about their voices.
Boldrey’s book consists of thirty pages of introductory material (in which the
categories and criteria used to arrive at them are explained) and a series of intricate
listings organized in various ways to aid in searches (listings of roles organized by Fach,
alphabetical listings of roles, lists of roles and their Fächer organized alphabetically by
opera, etc.). The initial thirty pages are particularly important because they offer a
rationale for the lists which follow and for the usefulness of such lists in and of
themselves (i.e. for the very existence of the Fach system). Boldrey presents this
introductory material for voice categories in both lists and prose. The lists include the
following criteria after each category: normal range, registers, timbre, weight/volume,
vocal challenges, [and] acting challenges.96 (Because his lists are so extensive, the reader
is referred to the guide itself for details on each listing.) The female categories listed by
Boldrey are: soubrette, light lyric coloratura soprano, light lyric soprano, full lyric
coloratura soprano, full lyric soprano, light dramatic coloratura soprano, light dramatic
(spinto) soprano, full dramatic coloratura soprano, full dramatic soprano, high dramatic
soprano, light lyric mezzo-soprano, full lyric mezzo-soprano, dramatic mezzo-soprano,
lyric contralto, and dramatic contralto.97 One can see at first glance that there are many
subdivisions of categories which are not represented in the Kloiber guide. Indeed, there
are four types of lyric soprano and five types of dramatic soprano. With his warning in
mind of not considering a singer necessarily confined to one particular category, these
96
97

Boldrey, 17-18.
Ibid.

64

subdivisions make sense. For the demands of roles considered appropriate for dramatic
or lyric soprano differ significantly within each group, and this type of sub-division seeks
to group roles together more precisely depending on the demands of orchestration and
tessitura. Such thoughtful and well-researched grouping of roles could indeed aid a
singer in finding the most suitable repertoire for her voice and in avoiding inappropriate
roles. Whether or not casting trends concerning body-type, acting abilities,
timbre/character expectations, etc. make such subdivisions purely ideological optimism is
a question worthy of consideration. For while tessitura and orchestration demands of a
role do not change, the casting trends do, and Boldrey’s intricate lists will probably not
have much, if any, influence on global marketing shifts. Fach, in theory, offers a list of
appropriate repertoire for a given singer and therefore a list of roles in which one might
succeed and enjoy the most potential longevity and health. Yet the shifting of roles from
Fach to Fach over time raises the question of just how pedagogically justifiable these
lists can be. Coming at the list not from casting trends but from pedagogical concerns, as
Boldrey has done, is the only way to fulfill the theoretical premise of Fach as protecting
the longevity of the singer. Yet when casting is at odds with such listings, the question
becomes whether such a guide should also inform readers of the expectations of the
contemporary casting directors. Boldrey lists numerous Fächer for most roles and notes
his suggestion for the most appropriate. This allows him to acknowledge actual casting
trends yet also state his pedagogically-motivated assertion as to the most appropriate
Fach.

65

Boldrey’s prose descriptions of categories, in contrast to these lists, trace larger
conceptions of Fach and the history of the terminology. In his definition of pants roles,
for example, Boldrey writes:

Pants or breeches or trouser roles . . . are associated with lighter voice types,
because most pants roles are younger characters. So most pants roles are sung by
light lyric sopranos or light lyric mezzo-sopranos, though they can be found
among all the female voice categories – except the dramatic soprano.98

It is true that recent casting has not considered the dramatic soprano voice type
appropriate for pants roles, however those roles which are more heavily orchestrated,
such as der Komponist (Ariadne auf Naxos) or Octavian (Der Rosenkavalier) have often
been sung by dramatic sopranos. Indeed, even today one hears stories of German houses
casting women with the “appropriate” body type and acting skills in trouser roles
regardless their exact voice types. (The Fach system is one in which even a cautious
general statement such as that above can be shown too ambitious when taken in a larger
temporal context.)
Of particular significance for this study is the distinction Boldrey draws between
the light lyric mezzo-soprano and the full lyric mezzo-soprano. One rarely sees a singer
billed with such distinct terminology, yet the distinctions are worth consideration.
Although the difference between light and full is essentially one of timbre, the division of
the lyric mezzo-soprano Fach allows in practice for a division of roles beyond that of
timbre (character type, agility demands, tessitura, etc.). It is striking that with so many
divisions of the soprano voices, including four distinct types of coloratura sopranos,
98

Boldrey, 21.

66

Boldrey did not suggest the category of coloratura mezzo-soprano. If the lyric mezzosoprano has accumulated the bulk of the trouser roles and coloratura mezzo roles, there
remain some lyric mezzo-sopranos who either lack the agility for such roles or do not
have the body types or acting/movement skills to portray the trouser roles. Without the
possibility of a separation of the lyric mezzo-soprano Fach into two categories, the lyric
mezzo who is not appropriate for trouser or Rossini roles finds herself gravitating
towards a small number of French roles such as Carmen or Dalila, all the while knowing
that these roles are often considered more appropriate for dramatic mezzo-sopranos.99
Boldrey explains the difference of the light and full categories by addressing both vocal
qualities and role suitability: “The light lyric mezzo-soprano, like her soprano
counterparts, usually has a slender, bright voice, one that is able to move quickly and
flexibly through coloratura passages. It is a voice of youth and exuberance.”100 The full
lyric mezzo-soprano “may or not have a flexible voice, but she does have fullness and
warmth.”101 For the light lyric mezzo-soprano, Boldrey states, there are some female
roles (Mercédés, Marcellina, Rosina), yet “some of the most delightful pants roles in
opera are written for the light lyric mezzo-soprano,” such as Siébel, Urbain, Hänsel, and
Cherubino.102 The full lyric-mezzo, on the other hand, “is the choice of many early and

99

Once the singer has progressed beyond the young artist stage, of course, these boundaries cease

to exist.
100

Boldrey, 25.
Ibid.
102
For Hänsel, and to a large extent Cherubino, this statement makes some sense, even if one
cannot prove that the singers who premiered the roles would today be considered light lyric mezzosopranos. For Siébel, and especially for Urbain, there is nothing about the role that suggests the
appropriateness of any type of mezzo-soprano voice. Rather, the roles were clearly written for a soprano
voice. (See, for example the tessitura of the roles in Table 7, below.)
101

67

middle nineteenth-century French composers for their young romantic heroines,” such as
Charlotte (Werther), and Dulicnée (Don Quichotte).103
Boldrey’s prose description of the dramatic mezzo-soprano does not include any
vocal characteristics, but rather revolves solely around character type:

The dramatic mezzo-soprano is the female “heavy” in most operas. She is the
mother, the witch, the whore, the dowager, sometimes even the queen. She is a
favorite voice of Verdi and Wagner, as well as of the composers of Eastern
Europe and Russia. She also appears in most twentieth-century operas written in
America or Europe.104

It is interesting to note that here Kloiber and Boldrey seem to have differed in the voices
for which they considered acting skills and/or character type significant enough to list.
For Kloiber, the dramatic mezzo is a serious type and was therefore described solely by
vocal characteristics.105 Boldrey had already covered vocal characteristics in the lists and
one may easily read the prose description with vocal attributes as a given. Yet Boldrey
did discuss the voice for the other prose definitions and chose to focus on character type
in this description.
For Boldrey, role categorization is concerned with more criteria than general
tessitura and orchestration demands. Boldrey identifies numerous relevant factors worth
consideration, most notably when the highest notes in the role occur in the opera, and

103

Ibid. Boldrey does indicate Sesto (La clemenza di Tito) as a pants role for the full lyric mezzosoprano. This is intriguing because the role does not differ greatly in tessitura or orchestration demands
from those roles listed appropriate for light lyric mezzo-soprano. Indeed, since the full lyric is not
necessarily expected to have an agile voice, it would seem that any of the more florid trouser roles would
gravitate towards the lighter Fach.
104
Boldrey, 26.
105
Perhaps this is a reflection of the traditionally different acting and movement expectations in
serious opera as opposed to comic opera.

68

how the tessitura for ensemble numbers and solo singing differs.106 These criteria are
important for consideration, however one might argue that casting trends have trumped at
least the latter consideration. For directors have “solved” some of the tessitura
inconsistencies in order to have the voice type of contemporary favor. Despina (Cosí fan
Tutte) is an example Boldrey offers as a light voice type whose main necessity be acting
skills. She sings the lowest female part in the ensembles, and is indeed sometimes cast
with a mezzo-soprano. Yet the role is often sung by a soprano, and the tessitura for the
arias fully justifies such casting. The confusion arises when one seeks to understand why
Despina is given the lowest female line in the ensembles.107 To solve the problem of the
ensemble voicing, many directors switch the female voices so that Dorabella is on the
lowest and Despina on the highest part. (This solution also helps many a Fiordiligi, since
trends have been to cast that role with a heavier-voiced soprano who often is thankful for
a break in tessitura and exposed agility demands.) A smaller-scale example of the same
type of “problem-solving” would be the common switch of Mercédés and Frasquita in the
card trio (Carmen) so that the highest note is given to the higher voice type.

Role-Shifting
One of the most important aspects of the Fach system for a pedagogue to keep in
mind is that it is always representing casting preferences of one particular moment in
time. The pedagogical reasons for considering a role to belong to one particular Fach
(and thus be appropriate for the corresponding voice type) may be overwhelming, but
106

Boldrey, 9.
A possible explanation for this seeming discrepancy is that most of the Mozart female arias
have a similar tessitura.
107

69

those pedagogical considerations can and do often bend to market trends. Though shifts
can be traced in most Fächer, one of the most interesting current Fächer to consider in
terms of the shifting of roles between categories is that of the lyric mezzo-soprano, since,
as mentioned above, the category was relatively nonexistent only a few decades ago.
Table 6 shows Fach listings from the 1973 and 2003/4 Kloiber and 1997 Boldrey guides
for some of the more popular roles currently sung by singers billed as (lyric) mezzosopranos. Because trends affect not only casting but also whether or not operas are
considered popular enough for listing in the guide at all, some of the roles are not listed in
every guide.

Table 6
Comparison of Fach Listings

Annius (Tito)

Kloiber – 1973
dram contralto
mezzo-soprano

Ariodante

Cesare

Helden-baritone

Cenerentola

lyric color sop

Charlotte

lyric mezzo
countertenor
(castrato)
lyric mezzo
countertenor
(alto castrato)
color mezzo
lyric mezzo

Cherubino

lyric sop

Dalila

dram mezzo
dram contralto

108

Kloiber - 2003/4
lyric mezzo

lyric mezzo
lyric sop
dram mezzo
dram contralto

Boldrey108
full lyric sop
full lyric mezzo
light dram color sop
countertenor
countertenor
dram baritone
dram bass
light lyric mezzo
contralto
full lyric sop
full lyric mezzo
light lyric mezzo
dram mezzo
contralto

Underlined categories are Boldrey’s suggestions for the most suited categories for each role

70

Dorabella

dram contralto
mezzo

lyric mezzo

Hänsel

Spielalt109

Idamante

lyric tenor

lyric mezzo
Spielalt
lyric mezzo
lyric tenor

Komponist

character sop
young dram sop

dram mezzo
young dram sop

Octavian

dram mezzo

dram mezzo
lyric mezzo

Orlando

lyric mezzo
lyric contralto
countertenor
(alto castrato)
color mezzo
countertenor
(alto castrato)

Rinaldo

Rosina

lyric color sop

color mezzo

Serse

sop
lyric tenor

Sextus (Tito)

dram sop

lyric sop
lyric mezzo
(castrato)
soprano
mezzo
(sop castrato)
dram mezzo
lyric mezzo

Ruggiero
(Alcina)

full lyric sop
light dram sop
full lyric mezzo
dram mezzo
light lyric mezzo
full lyric mezzo
light lyric color sop
light lyric mezzo
countertenor
light lyric tenor
full lyric tenor
full lyric sop
spinto sop
dram mezzo
full lyric sop
spinto sop
full lyric mezzo
dram mezzo
contralto
countertenor

full lyric mezzo
dram mezzo
contralto
countertenor
light lyric color sop
light lyric mezzo
contralto
full lyric mezzo
contralto
countertenor
full lyric mezzo
countertenor
full lyric color sop
light lyric mezzo
full lyric mezzo
countertenor

109

Spielalt in the 1973 version was listed as: Spielalt (Lyrischer Mezzosopran) – in the 2003/04
version, it was a category listed among the contralto categories, separately from lyric mezzo-soprano.

71

Siébel

lyric sop
lyric tenor

Urbain
Zerlina

color mezzo
color-soubrette

sop
lyric mezzo

light lyric sop
light lyric mezzo
light lyric sop
light lyric mezzo
soubrette
light lyric color sop
light lyric mezzo

It is most interesting to read through the column for the 1973 Kloiber listings separately
to get a perspective on the truly disparate Fächer to which many of these roles were only
recently thought to belong. For the repertoire has at some time or another been
considered appropriate for every idea of the female voice, from light coloratura soprano
to dramatic soprano and mezzo-soprano to contralto. There was clearly also a trend to
have trouser roles sung by men (not by counter-tenors as we find now particularly with
roles composed for castrati, but by tenors or baritones). Indeed, some of these roles were
so commonly performed in transposition to accommodate the tenors or baritones that it is
now difficult to acquire scores with the original keys.
To understand either why these roles were considered part of other Fächer or why
they have come to be considered appropriate for the lyric mezzo-soprano, a brief
overview of the vocal demands and extra-vocal traits of the roles will be necessary. The
determination of tessitura for a large role is tricky, particularly if that role encompasses a
great range, such as the Rossini heroines or the Strauss trouser roles. There are often
arias or sections of arias which employ a different tessitura over a significant length of
time for dramatic purposes. Likewise, many of the Mozart roles have different zones of

72

tessitura for the recitative than the arias. An attempt was made to mention the more
significant discrepancies and extremes in the far right column of Table 7.
To what extent orchestration can be compared when the size of the orchestra and
the overall orchestral idiom differs so greatly between composers is debatable. The
comments regarding orchestration, then, must be read as relative to other roles in the
opera and, at most, to other roles by that particular composer. The Strauss roles, for
example, even when lightly orchestrated, may in fact demand more penetrability of the
singer than a fully orchestrated Händel or Mozart role, particularly if the performance of
the latter is done with period instruments. Nonetheless, the relative orchestration
demands help to identify reasons why the casting of particular roles may have evolved in
a certain manner, because, with the exception perhaps of roles by composers known for
particularly heavy orchestration (Wagner, Verdi, etc.), we have come to expect
significant variety of timbre among the cast members for a given opera. The relative
orchestration of the role to other roles in that opera would justify the preference of one
particular voice type over another, even if the larger pedagogical justifications for such
preference remain vague, at best. Another significant consideration for orchestration
which is not represented here is the extent to which the vocal line is doubled in the
orchestra and the degree to which the orchestra plays in and above the vocal line. This in
mind, Table 7 shows the general tessitura and orchestration demands for the roles
represented in Table 6:

73

Table 7
Tessitura and Orchestration Chart
Role

Average Average Orchestration
Tessitura
Annius (Tito) G4 – D5
strings; winds

Ariodante
Cesare
Cenerentola

F/G4 - E5 full strings; occasionally
winds
D4 - B4
full strings
(C4 - C5) at times full; wind mostly as
punctuation

Charlotte

F4 - E5

Cherubino
Dalila

G4 – E5
D4 – C5

Dorabella

G4 – D5

Hänsel

G4 – D5

Idamante
Komponist

G4 – F5
F4 – F5

Octavian

G4 – F5

Orlando

B3 - B4

Rinaldo
(1731
version)
Rosina

D4 - B4

E4 – E5

at times full; mostly light
relative to other characters
light strings and winds
greatly varies from none to
full/heavy
light to full, depending on
dramatic context

Exceptions / Extremes
lower tessitura in group
numbers except finale; higher
tessitura in No 17;
lower tessitura in recitatives
and ensembles
tessitura difficult to determine
because most numbers require
singing in at least two octaves;
performance tradition includes
ornamentation above C6
some sustained high notes over
heavy orchestration in Act III

often sings above staff in solo
and ensemble numbers; higher
tessitura in large ensemble
numbers; lower in duets with
Fiordiligi
slightly lower tessitura in duets
with Gretel

light to heavy depending on
dramatic context
relatively heavy/full at times
heavy (with brass) in all
often sustained passages in
parts of the range
higher and lower tessituras
light to full, often heavy
often sustained passages in
higher or lower tessituras
light to full strings; at times almost never sings above C5
full with winds
strings and winds
lower tessitura in arias

relatively light; heavier
orchestration mostly for
punctuation

tessitura is often slightly
lower; performance tradition
includes ornamentation above
C6

74

Ruggiero
(Alcina)
Serse
Sextus (Tito)

G4 - D5

light to full strings

F4 - F5
G4 – F5

Siébel

A4 - E5

light to full strings
relatively full orchestration
– winds, brass, strings,
percussion
light

Urbain

G4 – F5

light to full for dramatic
effect

Zerlina

F4 – F5

light to full winds and
strings

first aria demands agility and
often higher tessitura

second aria notably lower in
tessitura but usually omitted
agility including numerous
high Cs both sustained and
staccato; often highest part in
ensemble; in stretta/cavatina,
tessitura depends on
version/score with optional
highs and lows
slightly lower tessitura in
recitatives and ensembles

If performance ranges and comfortable tessituras for each primary female voice category
are, as Garcia maintained, roughly one third apart, this list contains all three main
groupings: roles with tessituras up to B4; up to D5; and up to F5 . As illustrated in Table
6, many of these roles have earlier been considered appropriate for either low or high
(rather than middle) female voices. Table 6, then, offers historical reasons for
questioning the classification of many of these roles as mezzo-soprano roles. Table 7, on
the other hand, offers pedagogical reasons for investigating the appropriateness of Fach
listings. In terms of very general tessitura demands, the roles of Cesare, Orlando and
Rinaldo would be most appropriate for a low female voice (contralto), while the roles of
Idamante, Komponist, Octavian, Serse, and Sextus would be most appropriate for a high
female voice (soprano). The orchestration demands for the Komponist and Octavian
require a more dramatic voice type, while the other roles could be feasibly sung by any

75

timbre category depending on changing tastes. Annius, Dorabella, and Ruggiero all fall
into the mid-range of the tessitura groupings above, and would therefore be most
appropriate for mid-voiced females (mezzo-sopranos).
While the Händel operas were apparently not performed often enough for
conclusion in the 1973 Kloiber guide, it is possible to consider many of the other role
listings from that guide with this tessitura information in mind. Table 8 shows selected
1973 listings and the tessitura-determined voice types:

Table 8
1973 Kloiber Listings and Tessitura
Kloiber – 1973
Annius (Tito)
Cesare
Cherubino
Dalila
Dorabella
Hänsel
Idamante
Komponist
Octavian
Rosina
Serse
Sextus (Tito)
Siébel
Zerlina

dram contralto
mezzo-soprano
Helden-baritone
lyric sop
dram mezzo
dram contralto
dram contralto
mezzo
Spielalt
lyric tenor
character sop
young dram sop
dram mezzo
lyric color sop
sop
lyric tenor
dram sop
lyric sop
lyric tenor
color-soubrette

Appropriate Voice Type
According to Tessitura
mezzo-soprano
contralto
mezzo or soprano
contralto or mezzo
mezzo-soprano
mezzo-soprano
soprano
soprano
soprano
mezzo or soprano
soprano
soprano
mezzo or soprano
soprano

76

Some of the 1973 Kloiber listings that seem puzzling in the context of current casting
practices make sense when viewed with tessitura in mind. Why, then, did such shifts
occur in the first place? The answer that seems most likely is that a shift is occurring
away from vocal demands towards character type as the primary grouping criterion. Yet
this is not the same character-type criterion as one found in Mozart’s day, when a singer
would specialize in either comic or serious roles. Rather, the common thread for the bulk
of the roles explored above is that they are trouser roles. Current trends are to cast a
slender, tall, perhaps lanky singer for such roles. Though expectations for Cherubino,
Siébel, and Hänsel also include great physical agility and ability to move convincingly
like a boy on stage, such expectations are different for more noble roles, such as Annius,
Idamante, or Serse. While outward appearance for trouser roles may be consistent across
various types of roles, then, the acting demands do vary. One might therefore say that
there exists a great variety of vocal and acting demands in the current lyric mezzosoprano Fach, and that the constant may be in general physical expectations. One thus
could further describe this Fach as requiring a tall, slender singer capable of fulfilling a
significant range of vocal and acting demands.

Chapter Summary / Conclusion
Voice classification and Fach are two separate and independent systems of voice
categorization, and the conflagration of the two can adversely affect the future career of a
singer. Unfortunately, such conflagration is almost inevitable when the titles of
categories for both systems are identical. The Fach system was indeed conceived as a list
of appropriate repertoire according to voice type, yet over the years each system has
77

developed independently and the assumption that Fach still offers roles according to
voice classification can lead the singer/teacher to the wrong repertoire. The Fach system
must constantly be re-examined in order to understand the organizing criteria that drive
shifts of repertoire. As shown above, the titles of Fächer continue to be voice categories,
even when the organizing criteria cease to be vocal traits.
Perhaps speeding the process of shifts in repertoire is the ever-increasing access to
single performances of a given opera. Today’s notions of a Fach tend to include both
particular roles and particular singers. Via elaborate photography for marketing, DVDs
of live performances, and pirated videos available on sites like YouTube.com, audiences
have heretofore unprecedented access to a particular singer and/or role portrayal. The
implications of such access include a more definitely and restrictively determined
collective expectation of a particular role or voice type. In the case of the lyric mezzosoprano, in other words, it is possible to look both at current roles of the Fach and at the
leading singers of those roles. Among the most popular performers of the majority of the
roles explored in the tables above are Anne Sophie von Otter and Susan Graham. Both
von Otter and Graham are known to be wonderful actresses capable of portraying male or
female roles, tragedies or comedies; both are quite tall; both are agile physically and
vocally; and both have performed a myriad of roles that differ significantly from one
another in tessitura, range, and orchestration demands. Their height, physical agility, and

78

acting skills have likely led the collective expectation of the lyric mezzo-soprano to
include such extra-vocal expectations.110
If these extra-vocal expectations are indeed influencing Fach listings, singers and
teachers must keep this in mind while selecting repertoire. The number one priority for
singers and teachers alike must remain the health and longevity of the singer. This
requires that roles are not assigned or learned solely because of their prominence in the
Fach deemed appropriate for the singer or in the repertoire of a leading singer of that
Fach, but rather that a separate critical study is done of the actual vocal demands of each
role. Furthermore, one must be open to consider a Fach or roles in a Fach that do not
necessarily seem to correspond to actual voice classification, while understanding that at
the early stages of the career, one is expected to offer arias that all belong to one Fach.
This would mean that a singer in the early stages of his/her career might find it in his/her
best interest to market him/herself in a Fach that does not necessarily coincide with the
exact voice classification.111 The assigned Fach for a particular role may indeed have
very little to do with vocal demands. Voice classification and Fach must therefore be
considered separately in order to maintain vocal health while negotiating the marketing of
a singer. This is particularly crucial to keep in mind when dealing with a Fach that

110

Of course, there are also currently popular mezzo-sopranos who find a smaller niche than von
Otter. American mezzo-soprano Kristine Jepsen’s repertoire, for example, consists almost exclusively of
trouser roles, and her fans praise her acting abilities above all. Another American mezzo, Vivica Genaux,
has focused on baroque opera, which includes trouser roles, and on showcasing her agility as Rossini
heroines. For Genaux, the press has focused on her vocal abilities above her acting.
111
As seen in the tables above, many trouser roles considered part of the lyric mezzo-soprano
repertoire are most suitable for the lyric soprano. A young lyric soprano with height, physical agility and
strong acting abilities might, for example, consider marketing herself as a lyric mezzo-soprano in the
beginning. Taking this route, of course, the singer runs the risk of further problems of leaving that Fach –
i.e. casting directors may not want to consider a singer for a lyric soprano role when the resume consists of
lyric mezzo-soprano repertoire. An early decision, such as this, may have far-reaching consequences.

79

encompasses roles with such different vocal demands as Orlando, Octavian, Rosina and
Urbain.
To a large extent, the restrictions inherent in the Fach system are loosened as
soon as a singer has established him/herself in the field. Yet the importance of paying
heed to directors’ expectations in the earliest stages of one’s career must not be
overlooked. Such expectations are significant enough that a lack of adherence to them
can keep a singer from getting an audition or from consideration for casting. The mixing
of repertoire from various Fächer, whether the roles be suitable for the singer or not, is
perceived by many as a deficiency in training and preparation. Choosing repertoire for
the earlier stages, then, is a delicate balance between vocal concerns (i.e. attention to the
strengths and weaknesses of a specific singer and the vocal demands of each role) and
adherence to the probable expectations of the casting directors who will hear the singer.
This greatly limits the appropriate repertoire for the beginning stages of the career, and
emphasizes the importance of finding those “fabulous five” arias with which to send a
singer on the market.112
The promise of advances in vocal science for a more accurate and less
controversial means of voice classification is great, yet if the separation of Fach and
actual classification is not recognized as such, the danger remains for the assignation of
inappropriate repertoire. Boldrey and Clark have each offered possible solutions for this
dilemma. Boldrey continues to treat Fach as voice classification, with vocal attributes as
112

The good news is that while at least three or four arias in this package must be predictable in
their popularity for whichever Fach the singer is marketing him/herself, there is license to the young singer
to include at least one comparatively obscure aria. For the lesser performed operas, there are
correspondingly less rigid Fach expectations.

80

the main defining features of each category, but he is careful to emphasize that singers
will actually fall into more than one category. Most importantly, he offers multiple
listings of Fächer for roles, drawing attention to the Fach he deems most appropriate for
vocal reasons. Unfortunately, Boldrey does not list the reasons for considering the other
listings less appropriate, since those reasons would highlight the discrepancies between
vocal descriptors of the Fach and the vocal demands of the role. Clark, on the other
hand, separates “voice” from Fach, clearly showing that they are not to be considered
synonymous. One cannot blame Clark for avoiding the listing the secondary levels of
classification under voice type (this would surely muddle the Fach listings and cause
unnecessary confusion), but the limitation of voice categories to soprano and mezzosoprano goes against scientific evidence for the consideration of three main groupings of
the female voice.
Perhaps the single most important thing for a pedagogue to recognize about the
Fach system is that it is in flux, bending to shifting socio-cultural tastes and
expectations.113 The limitations this system places on a teacher in the selection of
audition repertoire for his/her students is certainly frustrating, but the students must not
have their chances at casting compromised by the will of the teacher (however noble it
be) to assign repertoire without regard to the system. The way to fix the rigidity of the
system is to call for a consideration of Fach and voice classification as two independent
113

When a shift takes place, for example, in the expectation of a heroic male voice from the high
light voice to a lower, darker voice, the dilemma faced is that the music (i.e. the vocal demands) of any
given hero role do not change. In other words, the collective expectation of the voice for the hero shifts,
but the vocal demands of the heroic role in a given opera remain the same. In a situation like this, society
begins to expect a shift from a lyric tenor to a dramatic tenor. If the tessitura was appropriate for the lyric
tenor, this shift will likely mean that dramatic tenors are going to have to sing for sustained periods in a
tessitura that is uncomfortably high.

81

means of categorization. If voice classification comes to be understood as a
physiological fact or instrument type, and Fach is recognized as a grouping of roles that
share either vocal or character traits, it should eventually be possible for singers to
perform in more than one Fach. In other words, it would be possible to say, “she is a
lyric soprano (one voice type) who specializes in soubrette and French trouser roles (two
Fächer).” A change in the terminology of the Fach system to more accurately represent
the grouping criteria would greatly aid in solving the dilemma, yet that seems unlikely to
occur in the foreseeable future. The education of singers and teachers as to the fluid
nature of the Fach system vs. the physiologically-determined nature of voice
classification, on the other hand, is a viable and achievable way out of the problem. In
order for this to take place, the Fach system must be critically examined and discussed.
Yet while advances in voice science continue to provide evidence for the physiological
differences between voice types, Fach remains ingrained in a more obscure state due to a
lack of literature looking critically at the system. The tables above charting recent
casting shifts are only one model for such critical and analytic investigations.
Voice teachers and coaches alike continue to articulate their frustration with
repertoire assignation and the Fach system, particularly when the arias and roles they
most want to assign a student are not currently considered appropriate for that singer’s
Fach. This dilemma continually presents itself: does one assign a student the aria that
he/she will sing best and run the risk of disturbing the casting director’s sense of Fach?
Often this frustration leads to questions concerning the responsibilities of the directors.
Yet part of what makes the relationship between the voice teacher and singer so special is

82

its very unique and intense level of trust. The voice teacher has to be awarded a
tremendous amount of trust in order for successful training to take place. The singer
trusts that the teacher is not only good enough at what he/she does to lead the singer in
the right direction, but also that the primary concern on the part of the teacher is the
health and longevity of the singer. The casting director may indeed care about the
singer’s future, but one cannot expect a director’s primary concern to be the health and
longevity of every singer he/she hears. Nor ought we expect casting directors to have
enough training in anatomy and physiology to be able to engage with the questions of
role assignation in the same manner as vocal pedagogues. In the end, the responsibility is
with the voice teacher. The teacher must take this additional care when selecting
repertoire for his/her student, and the teacher must educate the singer about the
differences between voice classification and Fach. Though Fach and voice type seem
synonymous to many today, we, as vocal pedagogues, can and must create a critical
discussion that will result in the more accurate education of the singers and teachers of
future generations.

83

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Agricola, Johann Friedrich. Introduction to the Art of Singing, translated by Julianne C.
Baird. Cabridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Amalie, Anna Abert and Thomas Bauman, “Hiller, Johann Adam,” Grove Music Online,
ed. Laura Macy, http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
András Batta, editor-in-chief, Sigrid Neef, editor, ed. Opera; composers, works,
performers. Cologne, Germany: Könemann Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, 2000.
Bagnoli, Giorgio, ed. The La Scala Encyclopedia of the Opera; A Complete Reference
Guide 1597 to the Present with over 500 Illustrations. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1993.
Boldrey, Richard. Guide to Operatic Roles & Arias. Dallas, TX: Pst. Inc., 1994.
Borchard, Beatrix. “Pauline Viardot,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy.
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 28, 2006).
Buelow, George J. “A Lesson in Operatic Performance by Madame Faustina Bordoni.” In
A Musical Offering; Essays in Honor of Martin Bernstein, edited by Edward H.
Clinkscale and Claire Brook. New York: Pendragon Press, 1977.
Bunch, Meribeth. Dynamics of the Singing Voice, 4th ed. Vienna: Springer Verlag, 1997.
Clark, Mark Ross. Guide to the Aria Repertoire. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 2007.
Coffin, Berton. Coffin’s Sound of Singing; Principles and Applications of Vocal
Techniques with Chromatic Vowel Chart, 2nd ed. Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow
Press, 2002.
Croll, Gerhard. “Tesi, Vittoria,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy.
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
Davis, Peter G. The American Opera Singer; The Lives and Adventures of America’s
Great Singers in Opera and Concert, from 1825 to the Present. New York:
Doubleday, 1997.

84

Dean, Winton and Carlo Vitale. “Francesca Cuzzoni,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura
Macy. http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 23, 2006).
Doscher, Barbara M. The Functional Unity of the Singing Voice, 2nd ed. Metuchen, NJ:
The Scarecrow Press, Inc., 1994.
Elliott, Martha. Singing in Style; A guide to Vocal Performance Practices. London: Yale
University Press, 2006.
Fitzlyon, April. “Garcia, Manuel,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy.
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
________. “Pauline Viardot,” Grove Music Online (Opera), ed. Laura Macy.
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 28, 2006).
Garcia, Manuel. École de Garcia: traité complet de l’art du chant en deux parties. Paris:
Manuel Garcia, 1847. Reprint, Geneva: Minkoff Editeur, 1985.
Gounod, Charles. Faust; Opera in Four Acts. Milwaukee, WI: G. Schirmer, Inc., n.d.
________. Faust; Grand Opera in Five Acts with French and English Text. New York:
Mapelson Music Publications, n.d.
_________. Romeo and Juliet; Opera in Five Acts. Milwaukee, WI: G. Schirmer, Inc.,
n.d.
Händel, Georg Friederich. Ariodante; Opera in Tre Atti. Hallische Händel-Ausgabe;
Kritische Gesamtausgabe; Herausgegeben von der Georg-Friederich-HändelGesellschaft; Serie II: Opern; Band 32. Kassel: Bärenreiter, 1960.
________. Giulio Cesare; Opera in Tre Atti. Hallische Händel-Ausgabe; Kritische
Gesamtausgabe; Herausgegeben von der Georg-Friederich-Händel-Gesellschaft;
Serie II: Opern; Band 14. Kassel: Bärenreiter, 1962.
________. Orlando; Opera Seria in Tre Ati. Hallische Händel-Ausgabe; Kritische
Gesamtausgabe; Herausgegeben von der Georg-Friederich-Händel-Gesellschaft;
Serie II: Opern; Band 28. Kassel: Bärenreiter, 1969.
________. Rinaldo; Opera Seria in Tre Atti. Hallische Händel-Ausgabe; Kritische
Gesamtausgabe; Herausgegeben von der Georg-Friederich-Händel-Gesellschaft;
Serie II: Opern; Band 4.2. Kassel: Bärenreiter, 1996.

85

________. Serse; Opera in Tre Atti. Hallische Händel-Ausgabe; Kritische
Gesamtausgabe; Herausgegeben von der Georg-Friederich-Händel-Gesellschaft;
Serie II: Opern; Band 39. Kassel: Bärenreiter, 2003.
Hiller, Johann Adam. Anweisung zum musikalisch-zierlichen Gesange. Leipzig: Johann
Friedrich Junius, 1780. Reprint, Leipzig: Edition Peters, 1976.
Humperdinck, Engelbert. Hänsel und Gretel; Märchenspiel. Mainz: Ernst Eulenberg Ltd,
1982.
Jander, Owen. “Mezzo-Soprano; Terminology, Early Usage, Voice Types,” Grove Music
Online, ed. Laura Macy, http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
Kloiber, Rudolf. dtv Handbuch der Oper; Band 2 Puccini-Zimmermann. Kassel:
Bärenreiter Verlag, 8th edition, 1973.
________. 11th edition, 2006.
Lawrence, Van and Bernd Weinberg, editors. Transcripts of the Eight Symposium; Care
of the Professional Voice; Part I: Physical Factors in Voice, Vibrato, Registers;
June 1979. New York: The Voice Foundation, 1980.
Mancini, Giovanni Battista. Practical Reflections on Figured Singing. Eduard Foreman,
trans. Champaign, Illinois: Pro Musica Press, 1967.
Manén, Lucie. Bel Canto; The Teaching of the Classical Italian Song-Schools, its
Decline and Restoration. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Massenet, Jules. Werther; An Opera in 4 Acts. Kalmus Orchestra Library. New York:
Edwin F. Kalmus & Co., Inc., n.d.
McKinney, James C. The Diagnosis and Correction of Vocal Faults. Nashville: Genevox
Music Group, 1994.
Meyerbeer, Giacamo. Les Huguenots. Early Romantic Opera; Bellini, Rossini,
Meyerbeer, Donizetti & Grand Opera in Paris. Edited with introductions by Philip
Gossett & Charles Rosen. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1980.
Michels, Ulrich, ed. Dtv-altas zur Musik. Munich, Germany: Deutscher Taschenbuch
Verlag GmbH & Co. KG, 1977.
Miller, Donald. Registers in Singing; Empirical and Systematic Studies in the Theory of
the Singing Voice. Dissertation. Rijksuniversiteit Groningen. 2000.

86

Miller, Richard. Training Soprano Voices. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
________. National Schools of Singing; English, French, German and Italian Techniques
of Singing Revisited. Lanham, Md: Scarecrow Press, 1997.
________. On the Art of Singing. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
________. The Structure of Singing; The Technique and the Art. New York: Schirmer
Books, 1986.
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus. Cosí fan tutte. Die Sieben großen Opern; ed. Internationale
Stiftung Mozarteum Salzburg. Kassel: Bärenreiter Verlag Karl Vötterle GmbH &
Co., 2005.
________. Don Giovanni. Neue Ausgabe sämtlicher Werke; Serie II: Bühnenwerke;
Werkgruppe 5: Opern und Singspiele; Band 17: Il Dissoluto Punito Ossia il Don
Giovanni. Kassel: Bärenreiter Verlag, 1968.
________. Idomeneo. Die Sieben großen Opern; ed. Internationale Stiftung Mozarteum
Salzburg. Kassel: Bärenreiter Verlag Karl Vötterle GmbH & Co., 2005.
________. La Clemenza di Tito. Die Sieben großen Opern; ed. Internationale Stiftung
Mozarteum Salzburg. Kassel: Bärenreiter Verlag Karl Vötterle GmbH & Co.,
2005.
________. Le nozze di Figaro (The Marriage of Figaro); An Opera in Four Acts;
Libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte. Milwaukee, WI: G. Schirmer, Inc., 1951.
________. Le nozze di Figaro. Die Sieben großen Opern; ed. Internationale Stiftung
Mozarteum Salzburg. Kassel: Bärenreiter Verlag Karl Vötterle GmbH & Co.,
2005.
Parker, Roger, ed. 1994. The Oxford Illustrated History of Opera. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Raeburn, Christopher. “Dorothea Bussani,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy.
http://www.grovemusic.com (Accessed April 10, 2006).
Rossini, Gioachino. La Cenerentola; Ossia la Bontá in Trofino; Dramm Giocoso in Due
Atti. Erdizione Critica delle Opere di Gioachino Rossini; Sezzione Prima: Opere
Teatrali; vol. 20. Milano: Fondazione Rossini Pesaro, 1998.

87

________. Il Barbiere di Siviglia; Melodramma buffo in due atti di Cesare Sterbini dalla
commedia omonima di Perre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais; Edizione critica
a cura di Alberto Zedda. Milano: G. Ricordi & C. s.p.a., 1969.
Saint-Saëns, Charles Camille. Samson et Dalila; in Full Score. New York: Dover
publications, Inc., 1988.
Sanford, Sally Annis. Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Vocal Style and Technique.
Dissertation. Stanford University, 1979.
Steane, J.B. “Fach,” Grove Music Online, ed. Laura Macy. http://www.grovemusic.com
(Accessed November 30, 2006).
Stowell, Colin Lawson and Robin. The Historical Performance of Music; an
Introduction. Cambridge Handbooks to the Historical Performance of Music.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Strahle, Graham. An Early Music Dictionary; Musical Terms from British Sources, 15001740. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Strohm, Reinhard. Die italiänische Oper im 18. Jahrhundert. Wilhelmshaven:
Heinrichshofen’s Verlag, 1979.
Titze, Ingo R. Principles of Voice Production. Iowa City, Iowa: National Center for
Voice Studies, 2000.
Warrack, John and Ewan West. “Fach,” Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University
Press, 1996. Duke University. 30 November 2006
<http://www.oxfordreference.com>

88
