Toward Generalizable Machine Learning Models in Speech, Language, and
Hearing Sciences: Estimating Sample Size and Reducing Overfitting
Hamzeh Ghasemzadeh a,b,c, Robert E. Hillman a,b,d,e, Daryush D. Mehta a,b,d,e
a

Center for Laryngeal Surgery and Voice Rehabilitation, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
c
Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
d
Speech and Hearing Bioscience and Technology, Division of Medical Sciences, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA
e
MGH Institute of Health Professions, Boston, MA, USA
b

Running Title: Power Analysis and Reducing Overfitting in Machine Learning
Email Address of the Authors:
Hamzeh Ghasemzadeh, email: hghasemzadeh@mgh.harvard.edu
Robert E. Hillman, email: hillman.robert@mgh.harvard.edu
Daryush D. Mehta, email: mehta.daryush@mgh.harvard.edu
Corresponding Author:
Hamzeh Ghasemzadeh
Center for Laryngeal Surgery and Voice Rehabilitation
Massachusetts General Hospital
One Bowdoin Square, 11th Floor
Boston, MA 02114

ABSTRACT
Purpose: Many studies using machine learning (ML) in speech, language, and hearing sciences rely upon crossvalidations with single data splitting. This study’s first purpose is to provide quantitative evidence that would
incentivize researchers to instead use the more robust data splitting method of nested k-fold cross-validation. The
second purpose is to present methods and MATLAB code to perform power analysis for ML-based analysis during
the design of a study.
Method: First, the significant impact of different cross-validations on ML outcomes was demonstrated using realworld clinical data. Then, Monte Carlo simulations were used to quantify the interactions among the employed crossvalidation method, the discriminative power of features, the dimensionality of the feature space, the dimensionality of
the model, and the sample size. Four different cross-validation methods (single holdout, 10-fold, train-validation-test,
and nested 10-fold) were compared based on the statistical power and confidence of the resulting ML models.
Distributions of the null and alternative hypotheses were used to determine the minimum required sample size for
obtaining a statistically significant outcome (5% significance) with 80% power. Statistical confidence of the model
was defined as the probability of correct features being selected for inclusion in the final model.
Results: ML models generated based on the single holdout method had very low statistical power and confidence,
leading to overestimation of classification accuracy. Conversely, the nested 10-fold cross-validation method resulted
in the highest statistical confidence and power, while also providing an unbiased estimate of accuracy. The required
sample size using the single holdout method could be 50% higher than what would be needed if nested k-fold crossvalidation were used. Statistical confidence in the model based on nested k-fold cross-validation was as much as four
times higher than the confidence obtained with the single holdout–based model. A computational model, MATLAB
code, and lookup tables are provided to assist researchers with estimating the minimum sample size needed during
study design.
Conclusion: The adoption of nested k-fold cross-validation is critical for unbiased and robust ML studies in the speech,
language, and hearing sciences.
Key Words: Clinical study design, Generalizable machine learning model, Power analysis
INTRODUCTION
Statistical analysis and methods are essential parts of the scientific discovery process, and they play important
roles during the design of an experiment, its execution, and its final analysis. For example, statistical power analysis
drives the decision about the required sample size during experimental design (Cohen, 2013; Jones et al., 2003).
Additionally, inferential statistics allow for the study of a sample of a population whose findings can then generalize
to the larger population (Field et al., 2012; Lowry, 2014). Statistical machine learning (ML) is a group of statistical
tools and techniques that has gained a lot of attention in different branches of science, with particular application to
fields that are relevant to this journal’s audience, such as healthcare (Liu et al., 2019; Qayyum et al., 2020; Shen et
al., 2021) and speech, language, and hearing sciences (Oleson et al., 2019). ML provides many advantages over
conventional statistical analysis. For example, a single model can often incorporate features from different scales of
measurement (nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio). Also, the ability of ML to capture complex, high-dimensional,
and non-linear interactions among different features can provide a significant advantage over conventional statistical
methods. ML can be categorized into two main groups: supervised and unsupervised ML. In supervised ML, true
labels of the data are known a priori (e.g., knowing which speech samples are recorded from individuals with
Parkinson’s disease or from neurotypical individuals). Supervised ML encompasses a wide variety of methods ranging
from simple logistic regression (Menard, 2002) to deep learning (Liu et al., 2019) and ensemble learning
(Ghasemzadeh, 2019b; Sagi & Rokach, 2018). In unsupervised ML, unlabeled data are used to discover underlying
structures and patterns of the data (e.g., doing the same study but not knowing which voice data came from individuals
with Parkinson’s disease) (Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 2009).
Studies using supervised ML in healthcare (including speech, language, and hearing sciences) can be categorized
into two main groups depending on their aims: tool-developing and knowledge-developing. Tool-developing studies
primarily use ML to “create a tool” for performing a task automatically. On the other hand, knowledge-developing
studies (also referred to as ML-based science in the literature (Kapoor & Narayanan, 2022)) primarily use ML as a
robust statistical analysis and data mining tool to gain knowledge and/or answer research questions about certain
phenomena. Tool-developing studies closely resemble an engineering approach, and their aims could vary from
automated diagnosis and evaluation to segmentation of a signal of interest, to solving an inverse problem. Examples
of using ML to automatically differentiate healthy individuals from those with disorders (for automated

screening/diagnosis and assessment of treatments) include the identification of voice disorders using voice samples
(Arjmandi et al., 2011; Arjmandi & Pooyan, 2012; Ghasemzadeh et al., 2015), Parkinson’s disease using speech
recordings (Ghasemzadeh et al., 2022; Tsanas et al., 2012), amyolateral sclerosis using speech recordings
(Ghasemzadeh & Searl, 2018; Vieira et al., 2022), septic infants from the audio signal produced by their cry
(Matikolaie & Tadj, 2022), abnormal vocal folds from laryngoscopic images (Cho & Choi, 2020), intelligibility
assessment of aphasic speech (Le et al., 2016), swallowing disorder from high-resolution manometry recordings
(Mielens et al., 2012), screening for autism spectrum disorder (Crippa et al., 2015; Thabtah & Peebles, 2020),
predicting the hearing outcome in patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (Bing et al., 2018; Uhm et al., 2021),
and predicting language and communication skills of infants based on their speech-evoked electroencephalography
data (Wong et al., 2021). Studies that have utilized ML for segmentation applications include automated segmentation
of the glottis from high-speed videoendoscopy recordings (Kist et al., 2021), detection of high-speed videoendoscopy
frames with partial occlusion of the vocal folds (Yousef et al., 2022), tongue segmentation from ultrasound images
(Hamed Mozaffari & Lee, 2019), segmentation of videofluoroscopic recordings for swallowing studies (Donohue et
al., 2021), speech classification for improving the performance of hearing aids (Bhat et al., 2020), and identification
of the type of stuttering-related events from speech (Alharbi et al., 2020; Bayerl et al., 2022). Estimating parameters
of the phonatory system from acoustic signals (Gómez et al., 2018; Ibarra et al., 2021; Zhang, 2020), measuring the
distance between a laser-projection endoscope and the vocal folds (Ghasemzadeh et al., 2020), and compensating for
non-linear image distortion in fiberoptic endoscopes and performing calibrated mm-measurements in laryngeal images
(Ghasemzadeh et al., 2021) are some examples of solving an inverse problem in voice and speech science using ML.
On the other hand, in knowledge-developing studies, the main outcome is not the trained model itself, but rather
the knowledge that has been gained. One example from this category would be the application of ML for understanding
differences in phonatory functions between vocally healthy individuals and patients with phonotraumatic vocal
hyperfunction using ambulatory recordings (Ghassemi et al., 2014; Mehta et al., 2015; Van Stan et al., 2020), or
differences between mild and moderate severity of phonotrauma (Van Stan et al., 2023). Other examples would be
the quantification of the information lost in the perceptual evaluation of voice due to inherent limitations of the human
auditory system (Ghasemzadeh & Arjmandi, 2020), comparison between the information content of temporal and
spectral features of connected speech for clinical evaluation of voice and speech (Ghasemzadeh et al., 2022), the
optimum number of sensors for encoding articulatory information from electromagnetic articulography recordings
(Wang et al., 2016), the effect of speech duration on classification uncertainty of persons with dementia (Ossewaarde
et al., 2020), quantification of articulatory distinctiveness of different vowels and consonants (Wang et al., 2013),
evaluating the relevance of different features in predicting hearing loss (Lenatti et al., 2022), and investigating the
predictive power of different items of the Infant Monitoring Questionnaire on language outcomes (Armstrong et al.,
2018).
The Problem of Overfitting in Machine Learning
Despite their growing popularity in the speech, language, and hearing sciences, ML models are susceptible to
overfitting, which refers to models performing very well on one dataset but poorly on similar, but independent,
datasets. One contributing factor to overfitting is that the decision boundary of a model is determined during a training
process, and the boundary could be complex, non-linear, and in a high-dimensional space on the training dataset. The
second contributing factor could be due to improper implementation of model selection or hyperparameter
optimization components, which may lead to data leakage (Kapoor & Narayanan, 2022) and overestimation of model
performance. Model selection refers to the process of choosing the best-performing model out of many candidate
models. Feature selection is a common example of model selection in speech, language, and hearing sciences, which
determines the best subset of features or measures that yield the highest performance. Hyperparameter optimization
refers to the process of tunning parameters of an ML algorithm (e.g., parameters of a support vector machine) to get
the maximum performance. Whereas the possibility of having a high-dimensional, complex, non-linear decision
boundary and model selection account for many of the primary advantages of ML over conventional statistical
analysis, they raise the possibility of overfitting.
Proper utilization of an ML step termed cross-validation can both alleviate overfitting (Hawkins, 2004) and
estimate the generalizability of the trained model (Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 2009). Cross-validation is a method
that uses some portion of the data called the training set for training the model and then evaluates the performance of
the trained model on the remainder of the data called the testing set. Different cross-validation approaches are
explained later in the Cross-validation methods section of the paper. Reviewing the existing literature that used ML
in the speech, language, and hearing sciences showed some important trends. For example, many of these
investigations have employed simple cross-validation techniques only containing a single training set (see, for
example, (Ibarra et al., 2021; Van Stan et al., 2020; Vieira et al., 2022; Yousef et al., 2022; Zhang, 2020)). Another

significant observation was the sample size. While very large public datasets (several thousand to several hundred
thousand samples) are available for machine vision (Huang et al., 2008) and speech processing (Panayotov et al.,
2015), studies from the speech, language, and hearing fields are associated with small sample sizes (often a few tens
of samples). Small sample sizes are especially susceptible to overfitting, with extra caution required for the proper
application of cross-validation. This is especially true if the ML processing pipeline includes model selection
components.
The problem of overestimation of ML performance in the presence of a model selection component has already
been investigated in several studies. For example, two recent studies have reported very alarming findings in the
application of ML in speech, language, and hearing literature (Berisha et al., 2021; Vabalas et al., 2019). A recent
study surveyed the literature on the application of ML in autism and found a strong negative correlation between
sample size and reported accuracy (Vabalas et al., 2019). Similar findings have been reported on speech-based
classifications of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease (Berisha et al., 2021) and for individuals with different forms
of cognitive impairments (Berisha et al., 2021). These observed trends are at odds with theoretical expectations and a
strong indication of widespread flawed evaluation of ML in the literature, indicating the possibility of a widespread
overfitting and overestimation of the performance. A recent study has described this situation as a “crisis in ML-based
science” (Kapoor & Narayanan, 2022) that was mainly attributed to data leakage, which often refers to the existence
of some overlap (sometimes very subtle) between training and testing sets and not having “truly” independent test
set(s). Application of cross-validation without a “true” test set in the presence of a model selection component is a
common culprit for data leakage. Prior studies have shown that cross-validations with independent test sets are robust
to overfitting and can provide an unbiased estimate of ML performance (Krstajic et al., 2014; Parvandeh et al., 2020;
Varoquaux et al., 2017). Simulated data based on Gaussian distributions have been used to study the effect of different
cross-validations in the presence of feature selection and model parameter optimization (Vabalas et al., 2019).
Power Analysis in Machine Learning
When evaluating different cross-validation methods to reduce overfitting, prior literature has quantified their
effect on ML performance. However, power analysis of ML and the effect of different cross-validations on the required
sample size have not been addressed. For example, a recent meta-analysis of ML in medical imaging applications
found that, out of 167 papers, only four papers included some procedures for determining sample size (Balki et al.,
2019). In contrast, power analysis before conducting a study is a common practice in science and a ubiquitous
component of grant applications to the National Institutes of Health. These highlight the importance of this missing
piece in knowledge-developing ML studies. In conventional statistical tests, power analysis allows researchers to
estimate the minimum sample size required for achieving a target statistical power. This analysis is often done based
on effect sizes reported in the literature. However, with ML, power analysis can be defined in multiple ways. This
study divides them into two broad categories: “the required sample size” and “the recommended sample size.” The
required sample size follows the conventional definition, and it is the “minimum” sample size required to have enough
statistical power to reject the null hypothesis. In contrast, the recommended sample size is based on reaching a target
performance for the ML model. A common target performance in the ML community has been the ML accuracy
reaching a plateau, after which only marginal improvement is observed for increasing the sample size beyond that
point (Figueroa et al., 2012).
A comprehensive review of the “recommended sample size” approach was presented in a recent study (Viering
& Loog, 2022). This definition of recommended sample size and the adopted methodology in Figueroa et al., 2012
and its referenced studies neglect the effect size reported in the literature, which is a significant source of information
and a very powerful aspect of power analysis in conventional statistical analysis. Also, these methods are more
appropriate for active learning paradigms (Figueroa et al., 2012), where ML performance gets evaluated continuously
as batches of new samples are added to the dataset (often through labeling the data and not study participant
recruitment), and hence not applicable to estimating the required sample size during the design of a study. The initial
recommended dataset for these methods is also very large (100 to 200 samples (Figueroa et al., 2012)), and the final
sample size could be much larger than this number. Such sample sizes are practical in tool-developing studies, where
often the data just need to be labeled. However, knowledge-developing studies involve experimental design and active
recruitment of participants, and such high sample sizes would often be impractical.
In summary, the prior sample size estimation studies were focused on the recommended sample size and not the
required sample size. Additionally, the prior works did not consider the effect of different cross-validations on the
sample size. The current study incorporates the traditional definition of power analysis into the ML framework. This
new approach would allow researchers to use the effect sizes reported in the literature for power analysis during the
design of an ML study. Finally, an alternative definition of recommended sample size based on the effect sizes reported
in the literature is presented in this study that relates to the optimality of feature selection and its ability to find the

correct subset of features. We will argue why this alternative definition of recommended sample size is important and
more relevant for knowledge-developing ML studies.
Study Aim and Research Questions
Optimization (determining the value of a parameter given a particular desired outcome) is an integral component
of ML models. Two different types of optimizations can be differentiated in the context of ML. First, determining the
optimum decision boundary between different classes which is part of the training process and, hence, present in any
ML implementation. Second, model selection which may include feature selection, hyperparameter optimization,
optimization of the architecture of a (deep or shallow) neural network, selecting between different classification
algorithms, etc. The focus of this study is on ML implementations that also include a model selection component.
Also, we paid specific attention to feature selection in this study. However, the general findings should apply to other
model selection scenarios.
The main aim of this study was to show that the choice of cross-validation method has a profound impact on the
statistical power of ML and to provide a strong motivation for researchers in speech, language, and hearing sciences
and other disciplines to migrate from the commonly used single holdout and train-validation-test cross-validations to
more robust and powerful methods. Specifically, this study quantified the statistical relationship among different
cross-validation methods, the minimum required sample size, the number of extracted features, the number of selected
features, and the discriminative power of selected features. The outcome of this study could be used to determine the
required and recommended sample sizes of an ML study during its experimental design, to select the appropriate
dimensionality of the feature space for an existing dataset, and to help scientists with the proper implementation of
their ML processing pipeline to achieve generalizable ML models. Last but not least, the availability of power analysis
method for ML could lead to a wider application of ML in clinical science where researchers may have previously
thought that the sample sizes for their studies could be too small to apply ML. To pursue this aim, four research
questions were asked in this study.
Q1: How is the statistical power of an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?
Q2: How is the statistical confidence in an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?
Q3: What is the minimum required sample size to get a statistically significant outcome from an ML model with
conventional power requirements (5% significance, 80% power [α=0.05, 1-β=0.8])?
Q4: What is the recommended sample size for achieving a target statistical confidence of the final ML model?
This paper is organized as follows. First, the cross-validation methods that were investigated in this study are
presented. Then, the performance of ML on a clinical dataset is reported to demonstrate the profound effect of different
cross-validations on the statistical properties of the trained ML models. The implications of these differences and the
rationale for using simulated data for the rest of the paper are also presented in this section. The framework for
generating simulated data and statistical evaluation of ML models are presented next. The comparison of crossvalidation approaches using simulated data section is devoted to reporting the outcomes of three different experiments
designed to answer the four research questions. Experiments 1 and 2 answer research questions Q1 and Q2,
respectively. Experiment 3 was conducted to answer research questions Q3 and Q4. The results of the experiments
are put into the larger context in the Discussion section, where more general implications of this work are presented,
along with limitations of this study, generalization of its findings, and directions for future studies.
CROSS-VALIDATION METHODS
Feature selection is an optimization problem, and the cost function (the evaluation metric that is to be
maximized) is the accuracy of the classifier (Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 2009). However, depending on which
cross-validation is implemented, the cost function is computed differently. Therefore, our main hypothesis was that
the choice of cross-validation would significantly affect the statistical characteristics (average accuracy, standard
deviation (std) accuracy, and confidence) of the final, optimized ML model. Although cross-validation comes in
several different flavors, they can be categorized into two main types: two-split and three-split cross-validations. In
the two-split methods, the dataset is divided into (a series of) two separate partitions of training and testing sets,
whereas in the three-split methods, the dataset is divided into (a series of) three separate partitions of training,
validation, and testing sets. This paper compares two two-split methods and two three-split methods of crossvalidation.
Single holdout method
The single holdout approach is a two-split method and the simplest cross-validation approach. In this approach,
based on a target splitting ratio, the dataset is randomly divided into two disjoint sets: a training set and a testing set.
The training set is used for creating the model. The accuracy of the classifier is computed by applying the trained

model to the testing set. Therefore, the cost function of feature selection is the accuracy of the testing set. This means
the feature set that maximizes the testing accuracy will be selected for the final, optimized ML model. The main
advantages of this approach are its implementation simplicity and low computational complexity. Figure 1(A) shows
a schematic of this approach. In this study, we used a stratified version of the single holdout cross-validation to ensure
that both training and testing sets had the same proportion of samples from each class, with a splitting ratio of 70%
(training) to 30% (testing).
k-fold cross-validation
The k-fold cross-validation approach is also a two-split method, where the dataset is divided randomly and
evenly into k disjoint sets. Each set contains 2n/k samples (n is the sample size per each class) and is considered the
testing set for that fold. All the remaining samples constitute the training samples for that fold. Similar to the single
holdout, the training set from each fold is used for training the model, and then that model is applied to the
corresponding testing set to get an estimate of model performance. However, in contrast with the single holdout
method, the training/testing process is performed multiple (k) times. The cost function of feature selection is the
average accuracy over the k different testing sets. This means that the feature set that maximizes the average testing
accuracy will be selected for the final, optimized ML model.
The main advantages of this approach are that all samples contribute to the training and testing of the ML model,
and the robustness of model performance can be obtained by computing the std of the k testing accuracies. Figure 1(B)
shows a schematic of this approach with k = 3 folds for visualization purposes. In this study, we used stratified 10fold cross-validation. The selection of k = 10 was motivated by its common use in the literature and a recent study
supporting the suitability of this selection (Marcot & Hanea, 2021).
Train-validation-test cross-validation
The train-validation-test approach is a three-split method, where the dataset is first split into two disjoint sets
termed training-validation and testing sets. The training-validation set is then further split into two disjoint sets of
training and validation sets using single holdout, k-fold cross-validation, or a different method. An ML model is trained
using the training set and is then applied to the associated validation set to obtain an estimate of model performance.
However, unlike the previous two-split methods, the cost function of feature selection is either validation accuracy (in
the case of single holdout) or average validation accuracy over multiple splits (in the case of k-fold cross-validation).
This means that the feature set that maximizes accuracy across validation set(s) will be selected for the final, optimized
model. The selected features are then used to train the final model using both training and validation samples.
Critically, the final model is then applied to the testing samples to obtain a single value of model performance on a
disjoint testing set.
The main advantage of this approach is that the testing set is completely independent of the model optimization
process (i.e., feature selection in our case). Figure 1(C) shows a schematic of this approach with k = 3 folds within the
training-validation set for visualization purposes. In this study, we used a stratified version and reserved 15% of the
samples for the testing set. The remaining 85% of samples were divided into training and validation sets using 10-fold
cross-validation.
Nested k-fold cross-validation
The nested k-fold cross-validation approach is also a three-split method, and is, basically, a k-fold (inner) crossvalidation embedded inside another k-fold (outer) cross-validation. The nested k-fold cross-validation method thus
consists of an outer k-fold cross-validation that divides the data into k different folds, with each outer fold consisting
of training-validation and testing sets. Each training-validation set undergoes a secondary (inner) k-fold data splitting
to create training and validation sets. In this sense, the testing sets of the outer folds represent multiple independent
testing sets, the testing sets of the inner folds are intermediate validation sets, and the training sets of the inner folds
are the training sets. This means that, unlike the previous three methods, feature selection will be executed k different
times (one per each outer fold) and hence we will have k different estimates for the best feature set. In each outer fold,
the feature set that maximizes the average accuracy over the k different validation sets (one for each inner fold) is
selected as a candidate best feature set. Also, in contrast with the previous cross-validation methods, a consensus
criterion is needed to select the best feature set among the k candidate feature sets (one from each outer fold)
(Parvandeh et al., 2020). Figure 1(D) shows a schematic of nested k-fold cross-validation with three outer folds and
three inner folds per outer fold. In this study, we employed k = 10 and selected the feature set that had the highest
probability of joint occurrence among the k different best feature sets (one per outer fold).

Figure 1. Visualization of data splitting for the four cross-validation methods studied: (A) single holdout, (B) k-fold (k = 3), (C) train-validation-test,
(D) nested k-fold cross-validation (k = 3).

COMPARING CROSS-VALIDATION METHODS IN A REAL-WORLD CLINICAL EXAMPLE
The significant impact of different cross-validations is demonstrated here using ambulatory voice monitoring
data. A primary focus of our research group has been determining the real-world vocal behavior/function associated
with hyperfunctional voice disorders using ambulatory voice monitoring technology (Ghassemi et al., 2014; Mehta et
al., 2015; Van Stan et al., 2020). To that end, six different voice measures capturing different aspects of phonation
were extracted from the ambulatory data of patients with phonotraumatic vocal hyperfunction (PVH) and vocally
healthy matched controls. The extracted measures included fundamental frequency (fo), cepstral peak prominence
(CPP), sound pressure level (SPL), the difference between amplitudes of the first and second harmonics of the signal
(H1-H2), smoothed duration of phonatory segments (voicing duration), and duration of non-phonatory segments
(resting duration). The smoothed duration of phonatory segments was estimated from the outcome of the voice activity
detector by connecting contiguous voiced segments that were separated by half a second or less of non-phonatory
activity. No smoothing was applied to the durations of the non-phonatory segments. The methodology of processing
the ambulatory data and the definition of these measures have been reported in an earlier study (Mehta et al., 2015).
Similar to prior work (Ghassemi et al., 2014; Mehta et al., 2015; Van Stan et al., 2020), the day-long distribution of
each measure was constructed and eight different distributional characteristics (mean, median, std, interquartile range,
5th percentile, 95th percentile, skewness, and kurtosis) were extracted. The final classification features were computed
as distributional characteristics of each participant, averaged over all recording days, meaning each participant
contributed only one data point to the dataset. Therefore, the dimensionality of the feature space was 48 (6 voice
measures with 8 distributional characteristics). Our dataset included recordings from 153 females with PVH and 136
female controls. The dataset was balanced by selecting 136 patients randomly. To make the findings robust to the
random selection of patients and random splitting of the data, each analysis was repeated 500 times.
First, the average and std of testing accuracy for different numbers of selected features and different crossvalidation methods are presented in Figure 2(A). The results showed dissimilar trends for different cross-validation.
Specifically, two-split cross-validation methods (single holdout, 10-fold) yielded higher average accuracy compared
to the three-split cross-validation methods (train-validation-test, nested 10-fold), with single holdout tending to yield
the highest average accuracy for each number of selected features. Another significant observation was the impact of
different cross-validation methods on the variability of estimated testing accuracy. Specifically, testing accuracies of
the methods with a single testing set (single holdout, train-validation-test) were quite sensitive to the random splitting
of the data (larger error bars), whereas methods with multiple testing sets (10-fold, nested 10-fold) were quite robust
(smaller error bars). In summary, the selection of cross-validation method has a significant impact on the distributional
characteristics of the estimated performance of ML. The implications of these observations on the generalizability of
the findings and the statistical power of the model will be discussed at the end of this section.
Second, the effect of changing the sample size from 25 pairs to 125 pairs on the testing accuracy of the model
with four selected features was evaluated. Similar to the previous analysis, the participants were selected randomly,
and each analysis was repeated 500 times. The average and std of testing accuracy for different sample sizes are
presented in Figure 2(B). Interestingly, the estimated performances of cross-validations with two splits (single holdout,
10-fold) declined as the sample size was increased, which doesn’t follow the theoretical expectation. Conversely,
testing accuracies of cross-validations with three splits (train-validation-test, nested 10-fold) increased as the sample
size was increased. The implications of these observations on the generalizability of the findings and the statistical
power of the model will be discussed at the end of this section.

Figure 2. (A): The effect of different cross-validations on average and std of testing accuracy for different numbers of selected features, (B): the
effect of sample size on testing accuracy estimated based on different cross-validations.

Third, as we discussed earlier, the knowledge that is gained (vs. the trained model itself) is the primary objective
of knowledge-developing ML studies. Looking at features that are selected and the orders in which they get selected
is an important source of acquiring such knowledge. For example, in this clinical case study of ambulatory voice
monitoring, each of the six voice measures relates to a different aspect of phonation. The finding that a distributional
characteristic of H1-H2 is the best feature versus a distributional characteristic of fo would have different implications
regarding the etiology and/or compensatory behavior associated with PVH. To demonstrate the effect of different
cross-validation methods on the outcome of feature selection, the probability of different features being selected at
different steps of feature selection was computed from the 500 repetitions of the first analysis of this section. In this
fashion, the first feature was the feature that provided the highest classification accuracy. The second feature was the
feature (among the remaining ones) that provided the highest improvement in classification accuracy. The third and
the fourth features were defined in a similar way.
Figure 3 shows the results. According to Figure 3(A), the outcome of feature selection for the single holdout
method was very unstable (low selection probabilities), meaning the outcome of feature selection was very sensitive
to how the data were split into training and testing sets. That is, depending on the samples that were in the training set,
different features (and even from different voice measures) were selected as the most informative (i.e., the highest
classification accuracy) descriptors of PVH, which indicates low generalizability for the trained model. The situation
for the train-validation-test method was better, where the first and second features were consistently selected (high
selection probabilities). However, the third and fourth features had low selection probabilities. Lastly, 10-fold and
nested 10-fold cross-validation methods produced models that were much more consistent, with the highest
consistency of feature selection exhibited by nested 10-fold cross-validation.

Figure 3. A comparison of statistical confidence of four cross-validation methods: (A) single holdout, (B) 10-fold, (C) train-validation-test, (D)
nested 10-fold. The horizontal axes represent the 48 dimensions in the feature space (the 6 voice measures listed under the panels with 8
distributional characteristics per voice measure). Within each voice measure category on the plots, the distributional characteristics, in order, are
the mean, median, std, interquartile range, 5th percentile, 95th percentile, skewness, and kurtosis.

These three analyses showed the impact of different cross-validation methods on the ML outcomes, highlighting
the importance of employing appropriate cross-validation for ML in healthcare. Based on the result of Figure 2(A),
the average and std of the distribution of classification accuracy depended on how cross-validation was implemented.
Figure 2(B) showed that increasing the sample size had dissimilar effects on the distribution of the accuracy of the
classifier for different cross-validations. The statistical power of ML directly relates to the distribution of its accuracy;
therefore, we can expect different statistical power for different implementations of cross-validations. Now the first
question (research question Q1) is which method has the highest statistical power (and hence requires the smallest
sample size). To answer this question, we need to systematically change the discriminative power of features, the
sample size of the dataset, the dimensionality of feature space, etc. Also, we need to have thousands of independent
examples of each case so we can generate the distribution of the performance that is required for power analysis.
Therefore, simulated data were used for the rest of this paper.
Based on the results of Figure 3, the statistical confidence of the model varied significantly among the different
cross-validation methods. The next question (research question Q2) is which method gives us the correct answer. With
real data, we could not be sure which features are the most discriminative ones. Also, we cannot systematically change
the discriminative power of features, the sample size of the dataset, the dimensionality of feature space, etc., and
determine the recommended sample size for meeting a target model confidence. In contrast, with simulated data, we
know the underlying distribution of each feature and, hence, which features should be selected. Also, we can change
the parameters of the problem systematically. As a final note, more than 20 different voice measures have been
presented in prior ambulatory voice monitoring studies (Cortés et al., 2018; Mehta et al., 2015; Van Stan et al., 2020).
Additionally, up to 10 different distributional characteristics have been used in prior studies. This would add up to
more than 200 possible features. A practical follow-up question would be, how many features can be extracted for a
given sample size to have statistical confidence in the findings? The following simulation study will present
methodologies to answer these important and practical questions.
STATISTICAL FRAMEWORK FOR MACHINE LEARNING MODEL EVALUATION
This study assumed a balanced two-class classification problem (e.g., detecting the presence of a disorder in an
equal number of patients and controls in a clinical application) with a sample size of 2n participants (n per class). A
feature selection component was also included in the ML processing pipeline. Therefore, this study assumed a total
of m independent computed features, of which only l were discriminative. All analyses were executed on a server

running a Windows 2019 Server, with two Xenon Gold 6230 CPUs, and 768 GB of RAM. We used MATLAB R2021b
for our analyses.
Table 1. Definition of symbols and parameters used in this study.
Symbols
H0
Ha
α
β
𝒩𝑚
P
N
𝝁P
𝚺P
𝐈𝑚
m
n
l
D
k
𝐶𝑙,𝑑
𝜃𝑖
r
p
nr
𝛾𝐷𝑏
𝛾𝐷

Definition
The null hypothesis
The alternative hypothesis
Probability of type I error
Probability of type II error (1−β is called power)
m-dimensional Gaussian distribution
Samples from the positive class
Samples from the negative class
An m×1 vector of means of 𝒩𝑚 for positive samples
An m×m matrix storing the covariance of 𝒩𝑚 for positive samples
Identity matrix with the size of m×m
The dimensionality of the feature space
Sample size per each class in a balanced dataset
The number of discriminative (i.e., selected) features
Cohen’s D effect size of discriminative features
The number of folds in k-fold and nested k-fold cross-validation
Statistical confidence of the model (the probability of correct selection of d features out of l)
Parameters of fitted exponential curves
Linear correlation coefficient
p-value
The required sample size to get a statistically significant outcome with conventional power requirements (α=0.05, 1-β=0.8)
The ratio of the number of positive to the number of negative samples in an unbalanced dataset
The ratio of the larger Cohen’s D to the smaller one if selected features had different discriminative powers.

Given the aims of this study, features of positive (e.g., patient group) and negative (e.g., healthy control group)
classes were generated from a series of multivariate Gaussian distributions. Additionally, to make the simulation
tractable, we assumed all discriminative features to have the same discriminatory power of D (Cohen’s D effect size
metric (Cohen, 2013)). Let 𝒩𝑚 denotes an m-dimensional Gaussian distribution with 𝝁P (𝝁N ) being an m×1 vector of
means and 𝚺P (𝚺N ) being an m×m matrix storing the covariance of the positive (negative) samples, where m is the
number of features extracted. Equations 1 and 2 show the formula for data generation, where 𝑿P and 𝑿N are n×m
matrices storing n samples from the positive class and n samples from the negative class, respectively.
𝑿P ~𝒩𝑚 (𝝁P , 𝚺P )
(1)
(𝝁
)
𝑿N ~𝒩𝑚 N , 𝚺N
(2)
For the negative class, we set 𝝁N = [0, 0, … , 0]𝑇 , and for the positive class we used 𝝁P = [𝐷, … , 𝐷, 0, … , 0]𝑇 , with the
first l elements of 𝝁P equal to D and the remaining m−l elements equal to 0. Additionally, we used 𝚺N = 𝚺P = 𝐈𝑚 ,
where 𝐈𝑚 is an identity matrix with the size of m×m.
Comparing the definition of the 𝑿P and 𝑿N shows that only the first l features of the positive and negative classes
had different distributions and hence were discriminative, and the remaining m−l features were irrelevant. The goal is
then to find those l features and then train a classifier on them. This goal is an optimization problem and can be broken
into two separate components: (1) selecting a proper cost function and (2) adopting a strategy for searching the solution
space. This study adopted a wrapper-forward feature selection method due to its high performance and low
computational cost (Ghasemzadeh, 2019a). The cost function of a wrapper method is the performance of a classifier.
This means the subset of features that maximizes the classification performance gets selected. Forward feature
selection refers to the search strategy. It is an iterative greedy search algorithm that starts with an empty selected set.
At each stage, the remaining features are sequentially added to the selected set. The feature that leads to the maximum
improvement of the cost function is added to the selected set. The process is repeated until the addition of new features
doesn’t improve the cost function. Finally, logistic regression was used as the classifier. This was primarily motivated
by its widespread usage in speech, language, and hearing sciences, the simplicity of its algorithm that offers
interpretability and produces a closed-form model, and the underlying distributions of the positive and negative
classes. Specifically, the positive and negative samples were generated based on multivariate Gaussian distributions
with the same covariance but different means; therefore, the true decision boundary should be a hyperplane. Logistic

regression implements such a decision boundary and hence would be optimal for our problem. See Table 1 for a
summary of symbols and parameters used in this study.
Statistical evaluation criteria
To answer Q1 and Q3, the null (H0) and alternative (Ha) hypotheses need to be formed. There is an implicit
assumption in the application of supervised ML that the extracted features have better discriminative power compared
to random features. This assumption can be used to formulate H0 and Ha for a supervised ML problem.
Ha: Extracted features will perform significantly better than random features.
To formally test this directional hypothesis, we need to construct the distributions of Ha (i.e., the performance of the
extracted features) and H0 (i.e., the performance of random features). For this study, the distribution of Ha can be
estimated using Monte Carlo simulations by generating a series of 𝑿P (Eq. 1) and 𝑿N (Eq. 2) and passing them through
our ML processing pipelines. The distribution of H0 can be estimated similarly by setting D = 0. Once distributions of
H0 and Ha are estimated, they can be used for quantitative evaluations of different ML processing pipelines (e.g.,
different cross-validation approaches). This study has used the following evaluation criteria.
Distributional characteristics of H0
The distributional characteristics (mean, std, confidence interval) of H0 are evaluation criteria that provide
valuable insights into the statistical properties of different ML processing pipelines. For example, the mean accuracy
of H0 for a balanced two-class problem should be 0.5 (on a scale of 0 to 1), and any gain over that number is often
interpreted as the discriminative power of the extracted features. This interpretation is based on an implicit assumption
that the implemented ML processing pipeline is not biased. The distribution of H0 would allow us to evaluate if such
a bias exists and then quantify it. Additionally, based on a specific statistical significance level (α), we can find the
confidence interval (CI) of H0. Investigating Ha shows that the alternative hypothesis is directional. Therefore, the CI
of H0 would be the range of values covering the minimum of the H0 distribution to its (1−α)×100 percentile. Assuming
a normal distribution, the mean and variance of H0 contribute to its CI; therefore, the std of the H0 distribution was
another evaluation criterion for comparing different cross-validation approaches.
Statistical power and the required sample size
Statistical power is the probability of a test producing true positive results, i.e., the probability of detecting the
presence of an effect if effect exists (Field et al., 2012). The distribution of Ha and the target probability of type II
error (β) are the factors determining the power of a test, where power is defined as 1−β. Statistical power is closely
related to the required sample size for a study to detect a significant effect with a reasonable probability. The required
sample size depends on the H0 and Ha distributions and the selected values for α and β. To determine the required
sample size for different cross-validation approaches, the distributions of Ha and H0 were estimated for different values
of n (Eqs. 1 and 2). Then, for a given value of α, the upper bounds of the H0 CI, and, for a given value of β, the lower
bounds of the Ha CI were estimated and plotted. The point of intersection between the two plots corresponds to the
minimum required sample size. Figure 4 illustrates this for the commonly used values of α = 0.05 and β = 0.2 (power
of 0.8), which were used throughout this study.

Figure 4. Empirical estimation of the minimum required sample size as the value of n at the intersection between the upper bound of the H0
confidence interval (given α = 0.05) and lower bound of the Ha confidence interval (given β = 0.2).

Statistical confidence

ML is a statistical tool, and hence, there is a chance that the outcome of an ML model provides incorrect results.
Such inaccuracies are often quantified using performance metrics such as accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. While
it is well understood that the classifier outcome could be incorrect, the correctness of the model itself has received less
attention. The correctness of the model can be defined in terms of the features that have been included (i.e., selected)
in the model, as well as the coefficients (e.g., feature weights) of the model. The focus of this study is on the correctness
of selected features.
Statistical confidence of an ML model is defined as the probability that correct features were selected and hence
included in the ML model. In practice, statistical confidence is the probability of correct features being included in
the final model if we repeat our experiment many times with different samples drawn from the population. This
concept is especially important as it will have direct consequences on the interpretation that we make about models
and the knowledge that we gain from them. As an example, let us consider the application of ML for understanding
differences in vocal function and behavior between patients with a voice disorder and vocally healthy individuals.
Depending on which features are being selected, we may attribute and rank different aspects of vocal function and/or
behavior as the most likely contributors to causing and/or maintaining the disorder. Now, if the model has low
confidence and other researchers try to replicate the study, there is a high probability that they will find very different
results. This means, our conclusions about factors associated with the disorder could be unreliable, and, hence, we
may target incorrect (or at least suboptimal) aspects of phonation during efforts to prevent and treat the disorder.
Statistical confidence is a metric that measures such an attribute. Referring to the definition of 𝑿P and 𝑿N (Eqs. 1,2),
we know which features should be included in the final mode, hence, the effect of different parameters and crossvalidation approaches on the statistical confidence of the model can be quantified. The symbol 𝐶𝑙,𝑑 will be used to
represent the statistical confidence of the model for different numbers of selected features. Specifically, 𝐶𝑙,𝑑 is the
probability that, among the l selected features in an ML model, d of the features were correctly selected.
COMPARISON OF CROSS-VALIDATION APPROACHES USING SIMULATED DATA
Experiment 1: Distributional characteristics of H0 and statistical power
Experiment 1 addressed research question Q1 (“How is the statistical power of an ML model affected by the
employed cross-validation method?”) by investigating the effect of different parameters on obtaining statistically
significant outcomes from a supervised ML model. First, the effects of the four cross-validation methods and different
sample sizes on the distribution of H0 were investigated. Values of m = 20 (20 extracted features), l = 2 (2 selected
features), and D = 0 were used. Figure 5 shows the results of running each experiment 5000 times, with each
experiment defined by a given cross-validation method and sample size per class (50 to 500 samples, in increments
of 50). The plots show the outcome of fitting a series of two-term exponential functions on the result of each crossvalidation. The form of the exponential function was:
(3)
𝑦 = 𝜃1 𝑒 𝜃2 𝑥 + 𝜃3 𝑒 𝜃4𝑥 ,
where 𝑥 and 𝑦 are the predictor and outcome variables, respectively, and 𝜃1 , 𝜃2 , 𝜃3 , 𝜃4 are parameters of the
exponential function.
In Figure 5(A), the mean accuracies of the single holdout and 10-fold cross-validations significantly deviate
from the theoretically expected value of 0.5 for a balanced binary classification with irrelevant (non-discriminative)
features. However, as the sample size increases, the mean accuracies of these two approaches start to converge toward
the expected chance value of 0.5, indicating the accuracy that we saw at smaller sample sizes was due to overfitting
and not learning the underlying patterns of the data (as there are no patterns for H0). On the other hand, the average
accuracies of the other two methods are quite close to the expected value of 0.5, even for small sample sizes.
Comparing the mean of H0 accuracy among different cross-validations clearly shows that the lack of an independent
test set in the presence of an optimization task (e.g., feature selection, hyperparameter optimization, selection of the
architecture of a neural network, etc.) leads to significant overestimation of the performance and should be avoided.
The whiskers of Figure 5(A) depict the standard deviation of the accuracy of different approaches across the
5000 experimental trials. The most significant observations are that the train-validation-test and 10-fold crossvalidation methods had the highest and the lowest standard deviations, respectively. Also, we see a significant decrease
in the value of dispersion as we move from the simple train-validation-test to the more sophisticated method of nested
10-fold cross-validation. Finally, the upper bound of the H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05) depends on both the mean and
the dispersion of the H0 distribution. Theoretically speaking, the upper bound increases with increases in the mean and
dispersion of the H0 distribution. This is also reflected in Figure 5(B). Based on this figure, for all approaches, the
upper bound of H0 decreases monotonically with an increase in the sample size. However, we see significant
differences among the approaches, especially in lower sample sizes. For example, with 50 pairs, the single holdout
method has a significant chance (more than 5%) to get accuracies as high as 76.7% even if the features are irrelevant
(i.e., random features). However, this value drops to 62% if nested 10-fold cross-validation is used instead.

Figure 5. H0 characteristics: (A) mean and standard deviation of H0 accuracy (B) upper bound of H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05).

Second, the interaction effect between the dimensionality of the feature space (m) and different cross-validation
methods was investigated. Figure 6 shows the results. Based on Figure 6(A), the bias (the deviation from the expected
theoretical mean accuracy of 0.5) for single holdout and 10-fold cross-validation increases significantly as the number
of extracted features increases, whereas methods with independent test sets (train-validation-test and nested k-fold)
remain unbiased. Figure 6(B) represents the dependency of the upper bound of H0 CI. Based on this figure, the upper
bound of H0 CI increases with the number of extracted features for the single holdout and 10-fold cross-validations,
whereas this upper bound remains relatively constant for the methods with independent test sets.

Figure 6. Effect of dimension of the feature space (m) on (A) mean H0 accuracy and (B) upper bound of H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05).

Finally, the statistical powers of the different cross-validation methods were compared. To that end, the
minimum required sample size for a study to detect a statistically significant effect (α = 0.05) with typical statistical
power (1−β = 0.8) was determined for each experimental condition. Figure 7 shows the results, where the markers are
the outcome accuracies of the experiments, and the curves are polynomials of order 2 fitted on them. The portions of
the figures that fall below the dashed black line correspond to underpowered cases. The results indicate that the trainvalidation-test and the single holdout methods have the lowest statistical power. For example, the train-validation-test
method (Figure 7C) with 50 pairs of samples would be underpowered (it’s below the dashed black line, meaning 1−β
< 0.8) even with two highly discriminative features (D = 1) in our 20-dimensional feature space. The situation for the
single holdout method (Figure 7A) is slightly better. A different interpretation of the results would be, if we have two
relatively good features with D = 0.6 in our 20-dimensional feature space, the train-validation-test needs at least 200
pairs of samples for having an 80% chance of getting a significant outcome, whereas the nested 10-fold method
(Figure 7D) only needs 100 pairs of samples. Finally, the 10-fold cross-validation (Figure 7B) has slightly higher
statistical power compared to the nested 10-fold method. The most likely reason for this observation would be the fact

that nested k-fold uses fewer samples during the training and feature selection (in our case, 90%), whereas 10-fold
cross-validation takes advantage of all the data.

Figure 7. Comparison of the statistical power of the four cross-validation methods given varying simulated effect sizes and sample sizes. The
portions of the figures that fall below the dashed black line correspond to underpowered cases: (A) single holdout, (B) 10-fold, (C) trainvalidation-test, (D) nested 10-fold.

Experiment 2: Statistical confidence of the model
Experiment 2 addressed research question Q2 (“How is the statistical confidence in an ML model affected by
the employed cross-validation method?”) by investigating the effect of different parameters on the statistical
confidence of the final trained model. First, the effects of different cross-validation methods and sample sizes were
investigated. Values of m = 20 (20 extracted features) and D = 0.8 were used. The generated feature set was then
passed through feature selections with different cross-validations, and the two most discriminative features (l = 2)
were determined. Each simulation was repeated 5000 times, and then the probability of finding the correct features
was computed.
Figure 8(A) shows the probability of at least one of the selected features being correct (𝐶2,1 ), and 8(B) represents
the probability of both selected features being correct (𝐶2,2 ). Based on these figures, models generated based on single
holdout and nested 10-fold cross-validations had the lowest and highest statistical confidence, respectively. For
example, the probability of both features being correct with 100 pairs is only about 20% with the single holdout (i.e.,
there is an 80% chance that the final model is based on at least one incorrect feature). However, this number increases
to about 80% in nested 10-fold cross-validation. Additionally, comparing Figures 8(A) and 8(B) shows that the gap
between the two methods increases as we aim for a correct multi-dimensional model (here the dimension of two). The
nested 10-fold method has a slightly better performance compared to the 10-fold cross-validation method. This could
be attributed to the voting mechanism described in the Cross-validation methods section for aggregating the outcomes
of feature selection from different outer folds. Finally, the plots exhibit a saturation phenomenon, indicating there
could be a “sweet spot” in terms of the recommended sample size required for getting a robust outcome.

Figure 8. Effect of different cross-validation methods on the statistical confidence of the trained model: (A) 𝐶2,1 , (B) 𝐶2,2

Next, the interaction effect between the dimensionality of the feature space (m) and cross-validation methods on
the statistical confidence of the model was investigated. For this analysis, the value of D = 0.8 was used, and each
simulation was repeated 5000 times. Figure 9(A) shows the probability of at least one of the selected features being
correct (𝐶2,1 ), and Figure 9 (B) represents the probability of both selected features being correct (𝐶2,2 ). Based on these
figures, the dimensionality of the feature space (m) and statistical confidence of the model are inversely related to each
other. However, different cross-validation methods exhibit dissimilar behaviors. Specifically, whereas the single
holdout is very sensitive to the dimensionality of the feature space, nested 10-fold cross-validation is very robust.
Finally, there is an interaction effect between the sample size and the dimensionality of the feature space on the
statistical confidence of the model. For example, if we have 100 pairs of samples and increase m from 5 to 40, 𝐶2,2
drops from 91% to 73% in nested 10-fold. However, if we increase the sample size to 200 pairs, we will only see a
decrease of 4% in statistical confidence. This result indicates that, for a feature with a target effect size (D), there
could be a “sweet spot” in terms of the recommended sample size required for statistical confidence to become robust
to an increase in the dimensionality of the feature space.

Figure 9. Effect of dimensionality of the feature space (m) on statistical confidence of the trained model: (A) 𝐶2,1 , (B) 𝐶2,2

Experiment 3: Statistical characteristics of nested k-fold cross-validation
Experiments 1 and 2 showed that nested k-fold cross-validation offers the best statistical power and statistical
confidence of the model among the investigated methods. Experiment 3 addressed research questions Q3 and Q4 by
quantifying the statistical properties of nested 10-fold cross-validation and providing models that would enable future
studies to estimate the required and recommended sample sizes in the design phase of the study. Given the
computational cost of running nested k-fold and the number of required analyses for this experiment, each set of
parameters was simulated 2000 times.
Based on Figure 6(B), the 95th percentile of H0 for nested k-fold cross-validation was found to be relatively
independent of the dimensionality of the feature space (m). We formally tested to see if the number of extracted
features (m) and the number of selected features (l) had significant effects on the H0 CI. To that end, a two-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) in a 4×3 design was used with independent variables m ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40] and l ∈ [2, 3, 4]. The

dependent variable was the upper bound of H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05). Table 2 presents the result, which did not
show statistically significant effects of m and l on the upper bound of H0 CI, confirming the robustness of the upper
bound of H0 CI in nested k-fold cross-validation to m and l.
Table 2. Results of two-way 4×3 analysis of variance on the upper bound of the H0 confidence interval.
Predictor
Main effect: Feature space dimensionality (m ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40])
Main effect: Number of selected features (l ∈ [2, 3, 4])
Interaction effect

Sum
of squares
0.0017
0.0042
0.0093

df
3
2
6

Mean
square
0.0006
0.0021
0.0016

F

p

0.51
1.87
1.37

0.67
0.15
0.22

Next, the minimum required number of pairs (nr) for a study using nested 10-fold cross-validation to detect a
statistically significant effect (α = 0.05) with typical power (1−β = 0.8) was computed for 𝐷 ∈
[0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1], 𝑚 ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40], 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4]. Figure 10 shows the results, which indicate that n is
inversely related to D and l, and directly related to m, with D being the most influential factor. This means the function
for estimating nr must integrate all three predictors.

Figure 10. Effect of the size of the feature space (m), the number of discriminative features (l), and effect size (D) on the required number of pairs
(nr) for nested 10-fold cross-validation: (A) l = 2, (B) l = 3, (C) l = 4.

To derive a closed-form equation for estimating nr, for each pair of m and l, a power curve with the general form
of 𝑎𝑥 𝑏 + 𝑐 was used to estimate the value of nr from D. This resulted in 12 different curves. Then, the parameters of
those curves (a, b, and c) were estimated from m and l based on three separate flat planes (one per parameter). Let D0,
m0, and l0 denote the target parameters of a study for which we want to estimate the minimum required number of
pairs (α = 0.05, 1−β = 0.8). Equations 4–7 show the process:
(4)
𝑎 = 39.37 − 6.718𝑙0 + 0.263𝑚0
𝑏 = −1.985 − 0.023𝑙0 + 0.001𝑚0
(5)
(6)
𝑐 = −0.886 + 1.507𝑙0 − 0.015𝑚0
𝑏
(7)
𝑛𝑟 = 𝑎𝐷0 + 𝑐
The goodness of fit was evaluated using root-mean-square error (RMSE) and mean percent magnitude error (MPE).
MPE was defined as the magnitude of the error divided by the true value expressed in percentage averaged over all
testing instances . Using Equations 4–7 with the training samples (resubstitution error rate) resulted in the RMSE of
3.35 and MPE of 2.98%. That is the expected magnitude error of using equations 4–7 for estimating the number of
required pairs (nr) was less than 3% on the training set.
An independent test set was generated for the following sets of parameters: 𝐷 ∈ [0.55, 0.75, 0.95, 1.2, 1.4], 𝑚 ∈
[20, 30, 40], and 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Our preliminary analysis showed the value of MPE over all test samples was 11.6%,
which is substantially higher than the training MPE. Therefore, further investigation was carried out to find the source
of the difference. Our investigation showed correlation between MPE and the number of extracted features (i.e., m)
was non-significant (p = 0.13). Similarly, correlation between MPE and discriminatory power of the features (i.e., D)
was non-significant (p = 0.63). In contrast, MPE was highly correlated with the number of selected features (R = 0.82,
p < 0.0001). Our further investigation showed that the value of MPE was quite different among the cases where 𝑙 ∈
[2, 3, 4] and 𝑙 ∈ [5, 6]. Going back to Experiment 3, Equations 4–7 were trained based on data points with 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4].
Therefore, the test samples with 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4] correspond to interpolation, whereas the test samples with 𝑙 ∈ [5, 6]

correspond to extrapolation cases. The interpolation cases (45 data points) had an MPE of 3.5%, which is quite close
to the MPE over the training samples, and also had a non-significant correlation coefficient (p = 0.19). However, the
MPE for extrapolation cases (30 data points) was 23.9%, with a high correlation (r = 0.73, p < 0.00001). In summary,
Equations 4–7 are very reliable for estimating the required sample size for 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4], but the results become less
reliable as we start to use them for extrapolating into models with higher dimensions (𝑙 ≥ 5).
The statistical confidence of the final model (𝐶2,2 , that is, the probability of both selected features being correct)
using nested 10-fold cross-validation was computed for different numbers of pairs and 𝐷 ∈
[0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1], 𝑚 ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40], 𝑙 = 2. The results are presented in appendix Tables A1 and A2
with selected cases (𝐷 ∈ [0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1], 𝑚 = 10, 𝑙 = 2) plotted in Figure 11.
Finally, the recommended sample size in terms of the number of pairs (n) for achieving a target confidence for
the final model (𝐶2,2 ) can be obtained from Tables A1 and A2 in conjunction with linear interpolations. For example,
if we have two relatively good features with D = 0.6 in our 10-dimensional feature space, and we want to reach the
confidence of 95%, we need to have about 215 pairs of samples. However, to achieve the same confidence with 40
extracted features, 342 pairs of samples need to be used.

Figure 11. Effect of D and n on the confidence of the model generated using nested 10-fold cross-validation when m = 10.

DISCUSSION
This study was primarily motivated by the observation that many ML-based studies in speech, language, and
hearing sciences have adopted cross-validation methods with a single test set (i.e., single holdout or train-validationtest cross-validation approaches). Our initial investigation using real clinical data showed a profound impact of
employed cross-validation on the estimated accuracy and its dispersion, and the stability of the feature selection
outcome. Therefore, our main hypothesis was that the statistical properties of the final trained model would be
significantly affected by which cross-validation method was used, especially at smaller sample sizes (less than a few
hundred) that are the most likely scenarios in these fields.
Three experiments were conducted to quantify the impact of different cross-validation methods on the statistical
properties of the final trained models and to provide methods that would enable future studies to estimate the required
and recommended sample sizes during the design phase based on the most robust cross-validation method that was
evaluated in the current investigation (nested k-fold cross-validation). Table 3 presents a summary comparing the
statistical properties of the four cross-validation approaches studied. We would like to emphasize that the three factors
of bias (H0 mean accuracy), statistical power, and statistical confidence need to be considered simultaneously. For
example, while 10-fold cross-validation has the highest power, its estimated accuracy (if the ML processing pipeline
contains a model selection component) is biased, and hence should not be used. Conversely, despite the fact that trainvalidation-test method gives an unbiased estimate of the performance, the method has very low statistical power,
meaning the distribution of H0 and Ha have a lot of overlap. Therefore, there is a significant probability for random
features to produce high classification accuracies with train-validation-test method (please refer to Figure 5(A) and
Figure 7). It is hoped that the results of this work will provide strong motivation for researchers to move away from
single holdout and train-validation-test cross-validation approaches and instead consider using the unbiased and more
robust nested k-fold cross-validation method in future studies.

Table 3. A summary comparing the four cross-validation methods studied. Desirable model characteristics are marked with bold face letters.
Method

H0 mean
accuracy

H0 std
accuracy

Statistical
power

Statistical
confidence

Required
sample
size

Recommended
sample size

Computational
time

Low

Robustness
to large
feature
space
Lowest

Single
holdout

Highest
bias

Low

Lowest

High

Highest

Lowest

k-fold

High bias

Lowest

High

Highest

High

Lowest

Low

Low

Trainvalidationtest

Unbiased

Highest

Moderate

Lowest

Moderate

Highest

Moderate

Low

Nested k-fold

Unbiased

Moderate

Highest

High

Highest

Low

Lowest

Highest

Q1: How is the statistical power of an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?
Experiment 1 answered this question by comparing the distribution of the null hypothesis H0 (i.e., when the
features were irrelevant) and alternative hypothesis Ha (when some of the features were discriminative) for four
different cross-validation methods. Results showed that the widely used single holdout method has significant bias
(Figure 5(A)) and therefore can significantly overestimate the true performance; at the same time, single holdout crossvalidation leads to an H0 with a very heavy tail (Figure 5(B)). This means that, even if the features are truly random
(irrelevant features), there is a good chance for the single holdout method to produce a high level of accuracy. On the
other hand, not only does nested k-fold cross-validation give an unbiased estimate of the performance (Figure 5(A)),
but also its H0 distribution has a thinner higher tail (Figure 5(B)). This means that the probability of getting a very
high accuracy from irrelevant features from nested k-fold cross-validation is much lower than the single holdout crossvalidation.
Another advantage of nested k-fold cross-validation is higher robustness to the dimensionality of the feature
space. This means that the probability of getting high accuracy from irrelevant features increases with an increase in
the number of extracted features if the single holdout method is used; in contrast, increasing the number of features
does not artificially increase accuracy if nested k-fold cross-validation is used (Figure 6(B)). Considering that most
ML-based studies are exploratory in nature, they often start with a relatively high number of features, and, therefore,
using a method that is less affected by the number of extracted features is quite desirable.
The results of Experiment 1 also demonstrated that robust statistical results could be obtained with significantly
smaller required sample sizes when using nested k-fold cross-validation as compared to the single holdout ot trainvalidation-test methods (Figure 7). Considering that data collection is usually the most costly part of a clinical study
in terms of time and expense, a significant reduction in the required sample size could increase the likelihood of
carrying out a study that may have previously been deemed impractical or too costly. This reduction of the required
sample size of course comes at the expense of increased computational complexity of the nested k-fold cross-validation
method. However, the availability of fast computers and high-performance computing resources reduces this concern,
and the trade-off is quite favorable.
Q2: How is the statistical confidence in an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?
Statistical confidence of the model was defined as the probability of correct features being selected and, hence,
contributing to the classification outcome. Experiment 2 answered research question Q2 by quantifying the effect of
the four cross-validation methods on the statistical confidence of the model. Based on Figure 8, the statistical
confidence of the model based on nested k-fold cross-validation could be as much as 4 times higher than the confidence
associated with the model based on single holdout cross-validation. The other important finding was the dissimilar
behavior of statistical confidence of the model when the number of extracted features increases. Based on Figure 9(B)
not only does the nested k-fold cross-validation lead to significantly higher confidence in the model, but it is also more
robust than the other methods to the dimensionality of the feature space. Therefore, whereas we need to be extra
cautious and extract “as few” features as possible when employing single holdout cross-validation, we could relax this
requirement and extract more features with nested k-fold cross-validation. In practice, this relaxation could
significantly increase the chance of finding more powerful and discriminative features. These important characteristics
should provide further motivation for shifting from the single holdout method to nested k-fold cross-validation.
Based on the results of Experiments 1 and 2, the nested k-fold cross-validation method exhibited the best
performance, followed by the 10-fold cross-validation method. Train-validation-test cross-validation, which is a
popular method in the machine learning community due to its unbiased estimate of accuracy (see Figure 5(A)) and

the simplicity of its implementation, had the lowest statistical power (Figure 7) and needed even more samples
compared to the single holdout method. However, the statistical confidence of the model generated based on the trainvalidation-test was much higher than the single holdout method (Figure 8). This higher confidence is attributed to our
implementation of train-validation-test cross-validation. Specifically, the train-validation part was split using 10-fold
cross-validation in our implementation, and, based on Figure 8, employing 10-fold cross-validation leads to models
with high statistical confidence. Then, the inferior statistical confidence of the model in the train-validation-test
compared to the 10-fold cross-validation is attributed to the fact that the train-validation-test method only uses a
portion of data for feature selection (85% in our implementation). However, if the train-validation part was split using
a single holdout method (which in fact is very common in practice), the statistical confidence of the model based on
the train-validation-test would have been lower than the statistical confidence of the single holdout method. In
summary, the findings of this study advise against any application of single holdout and train-validation-test
altogether.
Q3: What is the minimum required sample size to get a statistically significant outcome from an ML model
with conventional power requirements (5% significance, 80% power [α=0.05, 1-β=0.8])?
Experiment 3 was devoted to answering research questions Q3 and Q4 for a model employing nested 10-fold
cross-validation, which was the method with the best statistical properties. This model was described in Equations 4–
7. The discriminative power of selected features (D) was the most influential factor in determining the minimum
required sample size, followed by the dimensionality of the model (l), and then the number of extracted features (m).
Additionally, the minimum required sample size in terms of the number of pairs (nr) decreases as the discriminative
power of selected features (D) or dimensionality of the model (l) increases. In contrast, the minimum required sample
size increases as the number of extracted features (m) increases.
This last observation may seem to contradict the robustness of the distribution of the null hypothesis regarding
the number of extracted features (Figure 6(B) and Table 2) and warrants further explanation. The minimum required
sample size depends on the distributions of both null and alternative hypotheses. The distribution of the null hypothesis
of nested k-fold cross-validation is relatively invariant to the number of extracted features (similar value of α for a
fixed threshold). However, as more features get extracted (a larger m), the distribution of the alternative hypothesis
changes and gets more overlapped with that of the null hypothesis (β increases). Therefore, the required sample size
needs to be increased to reduce the value of β and attain similar statistical power.
Lastly, an example is provided to show how Equations 4–7 can be used to estimate the required sample size
during the experimental design. Let’s consider the example presented in “COMPARING CROSS-VALIDATION
METHODS IN A REAL-WORLD CLINICAL EXAMPLE” section, where we know we want to extract 48 features
prior to the execution of the study. Prior studies have reported the effect sizes in the range of 0.43–0.88 for such a
problem (Van Stan et al., 2020). Plugging D0 = 0.66 (as an average expected effect size), m0 = 48, and l0 = 2 into
Equations 4–7, we get nr = 89.3, meaning that we need to recruit a minimum of 90 pairs of participants to have the
adequate power to run the analysis.
Q4: What is the recommended sample size for achieving a target statistical confidence of the final ML model?
The second part of Experiment 3 provided an answer to Q4 for nested 10-fold cross-validation. While we were
not able to derive a closed-form formula for this case, different tables and MATLAB code are provided that can be
used for linear interpolation and estimation of the recommended sample size for target values of D and m. It is
noteworthy that using Tables A1 and A2 for estimating the recommended number of pairs (n) will result in a larger
value compared to Equations 4–7. For example, we only need 89 pairs for D = 0.6, m = 20, and l = 2 to obtain a
statistically significant effect (α = 0.05, 1−β = 0.8). However, 89 pairs with the same parameters will provide 50%
confidence in the model. To achieve model confidence of 80% and 95%, respectively, the sample size needs to be
increased to 169 and 247 pairs. This wide gap is because Equations 4–7 estimate the required n for just having the
statistical power to detect a significant effect. Whereas, having a model with high statistical confidence (a large 𝐶2,2 )
is a more restrictive requirement than getting a statistically significant outcome and, therefore, requires more samples.
The number of pairs necessary for reaching a certain confidence in the model increases with a decrease in the
discriminative power of features (D) and with an increase in the number of extracted features (m). As a final note,
considering the negative effect of the high number of extracted features on the statistical power and statistical
confidence of the model, keeping the number of extracted features relatively low is preferable.
ML solutions often have different optimization processes. The focus of this study was to quantify the statistical
characteristics of different cross-validation methods in the presence of feature selection. However, other processes
including hyperparameter optimization and optimization of the architecture (e.g., in deep learning) are also important
and widely used in the ML community. While the specific findings (e.g., the method for estimating the required sample

size) of this study are limited to cases with feature selection, the general findings can be applied to other optimization
scenarios. For example, single holdout or train-validation-test cross-validation methods should not be used for
hyperparameter optimization and optimization of the architecture of deep networks. Instead, the nested k-fold crossvalidation method should be employed. This argument is especially important for research with small sample sizes
(less than a few hundred).
Computing appropriate dimensionality of the feature space
The presented power analysis method (Equations 4–7) was derived to assist researchers with determining the
minimum sample size required during experimental design; however, the method can also be used for existing datasets.
Specifically, during experimental design, researchers know the features that they want to use so the dimensionality of
the feature space can be estimated, and their goal is to determine the required sample size. However, the situation
reverses with existing datasets. That is, the sample size is already known, and the goal is to determine the appropriate
dimensionality of the feature space. The presented method can also be used to estimate the maximum allowable
dimensionality of the feature space. If the number of extracted features were higher than this estimated number, some
features would need to be eliminated such that the dimensionality of the feature space gets below the maximum
allowable dimension. We would like to emphasize that this elimination should be carried out independently from the
labels of the dataset; otherwise, the elimination procedure will most likely overestimate the performance of the model
and will reduce the generalizability of the findings. Some examples of appropriate elimination would be using the
literature (generated from different datasets) for removing inferior features, computing correlation between features
of the dataset and only keeping one among highly correlated features, or applying an unsupervised dimensionality
reduction without any optimization based on the labels of the dataset.
Lastly, an example is provided to show how Equations 4–7 can be used to estimate appropriate dimensionality
of the feature space for an existing dataset. Let’s consider the example presented in “COMPARING CROSSVALIDATION METHODS IN A REAL-WORLD CLINICAL EXAMPLE” section, where our existing dataset has
136 pairs of participants. Plugging D0 = 0.66 (as an average expected effect size), m0 = 135, and l0 = 2 into Equations
4–7 we get nr = 135.2≈136, meaning that with 136 pairs of participants the maximum allowable dimensionality of the
feature space would be 135.
Limitations
Despite the importance of our current findings, several limitations should be mentioned. Our findings were based
on Monte Carlo simulations, and we had to make certain assumptions to keep the complexity of our simulations
manageable. Those assumptions are responsible for most of the limitations of our findings. The first assumption was
that ML models were being used for a binary classification problem. Although the findings would still be valid for a
multi-class classification problem (e.g., that the single holdout method is the least reliable and nested k-fold crossvalidation is the most reliable method), the results of Experiment 3 could not be applied directly to other classification
problems and need to be simulated separately. The second assumption was that of a balanced dataset (equal number
of samples in both classes), which in practice may not be achievable or desirable. The third assumption was that all of
the discriminative features each had equal discriminative power represented by the same value of D. The fourth
assumption was that all discriminative features had Gaussian distributions, and, hence, a linear classifier (logistic
regression) was able to find the optimum decision boundary. The fifth assumption was that none of the extracted
features were correlated, and the remaining (m−l) features were irrelevant to the classification problem. While it is
desirable to extract only features that add novel information to the model and are uncorrelated, in practice, this is
hardly ever achieved. Finally, it is important to note that the estimation of the minimum sample size of conventional
statistical tests (e.g., t-test, ANOVA, correlation, etc.) shares many of these assumptions and limitations, and, in that
regard, the methodology presented in Experiment 3 extends the application of widely used power analysis to include
ML models.
Generalizability of results to unbalanced datasets and other classification frameworks
As described in the Limitations section, the equations for the estimation of the required sample size were derived
based on simulated balanced datasets with underlying Gaussian distributions and with equal discriminative power for
selected features. This section includes modifications that would allow applications of power analysis to unbalanced
datasets and features with unequal discriminative powers. We will also present preliminary results on a direction that
could extend the application of the method to non-linear feature spaces.
First, unbalanced datasets were investigated. Let 𝛾𝐷𝑏 denote the ratio between the number of samples in the
positive (𝑛𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 ) and negative classes (𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 ). The following sets of parameters were used: 𝑚 = 20, 𝑙 = 2, 𝐷 ∈
[0.6, 0.8, 1], and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 ∈ [1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2]. Two different scenarios were tested. In the first scenario, Equations 4–7

were used for estimating the required sample size of the smaller class. The error was always negative, with MPE equal
to 44.2%. This indicates that using Equations 4–7 for estimating the required sample size of the smaller class leads to
a significant overestimation. In the second scenario, Equations 4–7 were used for estimating an adjusted required
sample size, where the adjusted required sample size was defined as the average of the sample sizes of the positive
𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 +𝑛𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
and negative classes (
). The error was reduced, with MPE equal to 12.4%. Further investigation
2
indicated that, as the value of D increases, estimation of the adjusted required sample size becomes more robust to
higher imbalance ratios (𝛾𝐷𝑏 ). For example, if D = 0.6 and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 = 2, MPE for the adjusted required sample size was
70.6%; however, for D = 0.8 and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 = 2, MPE was reduced to 16%. Therefore, Equations 4–7 are relatively robust
to moderately imbalanced datasets when employing the adjusted required sample size and if features are highly
discriminative (D ≥ 0.8). The figures for this analysis are provided in Figure A1 in the Appendix. In summary, the
“Compute_RequiredSampleSize.m” code provided along this manuscript can be used for unbalanced datasets,
however, the estimated required sample size would be the average of the number of negative and positive samples.
Estimation of the sample size of each class from the estimated average required sample size and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 should be trivial.
Second, a limited number of cases with features with unequal effect sizes (D) were simulated. To that end, a
series of 20-dimensional feature spaces (𝑚 = 20) containing two discriminative features (𝑙 = 2) were generated. The
discriminatory power of the first feature was taken from the set 𝐷 ∈ [0.6, 0.8, 1], and the discriminatory power of the
second feature was set equal to 𝛾𝐷 × 𝐷. The parameter 𝛾𝐷 captures the unequal discriminatory power between the two
(𝛾 +1)
features, and 𝛾𝐷 ∈ [1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2]. The average discriminatory power of the two features (𝐷0 = 𝐷 𝐷 ) was
2
used in Equation 7. The value of MPE was 7.9%. Our further investigation indicated that, as the value of D increases,
estimation of the required sample size becomes more robust to higher imbalance ratios (𝛾𝐷 ). For example, if D = 0.6
and 𝛾𝐷 = 2, MPE was 23.1%. However, for D = 0.8 and 𝛾𝐷 = 2, MPE was reduced to 16.7%. Therefore, Equations
4–7 are relatively robust to features with different discriminatory powers if both features are discriminative enough
(D ≥ 0.8). The figures for this analysis are provided in Figure A2 in the Appendix. In summary, the
“Compute_RequiredSampleSize.m” code provided along this manuscript can be used for features with different
unequal discriminative powers, however, the average of their discriminative powers needs to be used.
Finally, the possibility of applying the method to non-linear feature spaces and other classification algorithms
was investigated. The findings of this study were based on simulated datasets with underlying Gaussian distributions.
In that sense, quantification of their discriminative power using Cohen’s D and the application of logistic regression
were optimum selections. We would like to emphasize another rationale for parameterization of power analysis in
terms of Cohen's D, and then we will present a possible direction for the generalization of power analysis to features
with non-Gaussian distributions and non-linear classifiers. Researchers often use effect sizes reported in the literature
for estimating the minimum required sample size during the design of a study, and, currently, the application of
Cohen's D is ubiquitous in clinical sciences (Fritz et al., 2012). Therefore, the selection of Cohen’s D was driven by
this important practical consideration.
We will now present a possible modification that could extend the application of the presented power analysis
to more general cases. However, an in-depth treatment of this topic is out of the scope of this paper and needs to be
pursued in an independent study. Our proposed solution is based on computing an “equivalent Cohen’s D” for such
general cases. The “equivalent Cohen’s D” for a non-linear feature space is the value of D that, if used to generate
Gaussian features (please refer to Equations 1 and 2), produces similar classification accuracy with logistic regression
as the problem under investigation. We will demonstrate this approach with bull’s eye datasets with five different
noise levels of [2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4]. Different noise levels model different amounts of overlap between the two classes.
Specifically, for a noise level of 0, the dataset will be two perfect co-centric circles with a between-class distance of
1 unit. The noise level of 2 corresponds to a uniform disturbance in the range of -1 to 1 (i.e., equal to the true betweenclass distance). The noise level of 4 corresponds to a uniform disturbance with a range that is two times larger than
the true between-class distance. Figure A3 in the Appendix shows examples of this dataset with low and high noise
levels. A support vector machine (SVM) with a polynomial kernel was adopted for learning the decision boundary
between the two classes. For each noise level, the two dimensions of the bull’s eye dataset were augmented with 18
random features to create a 20-dimensional feature space (𝑚 = 20). Nested 10-fold cross-validation with polynomial
SVM was used to find the two most discriminative features. Following the methodology presented in the “Statistical
power and the required sample size” section (please refer to Figure 4), the true required sample size for rejecting the
null hypothesis was determined for each noise level. The equivalent Cohen’s D of each noise level was estimated from
a look-up table that we generated from simulations of Gaussian features with a logistic regression classifier. The
computed equivalent Cohen’s D was then used to estimate the required sample size from Equations 4–7. The results
showed an MPE of 8.6%, confirming the potential of this approach.

Directions for future studies
The study presented here can be extended in several directions. The first direction would be a rigorous and indepth treatment of extending the power analysis to non-linear feature spaces. Updating the power analysis method to
better account for unbalanced datasets and unequal discriminative power for selected features are other directions. The
current study showed that statistical properties of nested k-fold cross-validation are very desirable. However, only the
value of k = 10 was implemented. While the general findings of the study should hold for other values of k, we expect
an interaction effect among the power of the method, the sample size, and the value of k. A future study may suggest
the appropriate value of k for a given problem such that the statistical power of the model is maximized. The current
study used Cohen’s D for Gaussian features and proposed equivalent Cohen’s D for general feature spaces. However,
investigation of the most appropriate way to quantify and report the effect size in ML would allow practitioners and
researchers to use prior studies during experimental design and is a question for future research. A more theoretical
treatment of power analysis and all of the above-mentioned directions could significantly help scientists and
practitioners with the appropriate and responsible usage of ML. Finally, evaluating the effect of different crossvalidation methods on the performance of ML using Bayes Error is another direction for future studies.
CONCLUSION
Monte Carlo simulations were adopted in this study to quantify the statistical characteristics of different crossvalidation methods. Our analyses showed significantly different statistical characteristics among different crossvalidation methods. The model based on single hold-out had very low statistical power (meaning it required many
more samples to get a statistically significant outcome), very low statistical confidence (meaning it was very likely
for incorrect features to be selected), and very high bias (meaning it was very likely to overestimate the performance
of the model). The statistical characteristics of the popular method of train-validation-test were also very poor.
Conversely, the model based on nested 10-fold cross-validation resulted in the highest statistical power and statistical
confidence. Also, the estimated performance was unbiased. Our numerical analyses showed that the required sample
size with a single holdout could be 50% higher than what would be needed if nested k-fold cross-validation were used.
Also, statistical confidence in the model based on nested k-fold cross-validation was as much as four times higher than
the statistical confidence in the single holdout-based model. Finally, computational models along with MATLAB code
were provided to assist in power analysis for designing future ML studies to determine the required and recommended
sample sizes when employing nested 10-fold cross-validation. Based on these findings, researchers are highly
encouraged to avoid using the single holdout and train-validation-test methods and use the unbiased and more robust
method of nested k-fold cross-validation. As a final note, if the ML processing pipeline does not include any model
selection component (e.g., feature selection, hyperparameter optimization, optimization of the architecture of a deep
or shallow neural network, selecting between different classification algorithms, etc.), k-fold cross-validation (no
nesting) may be used due to its lower computational complexity relative to nested k-fold cross-validation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute On Deafness And Other
Communication Disorders of the National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers (T32 DC013017, P50
DC015446, K99 DC021235). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The authors would like to acknowledge the MGH highperformance computing resource that made the execution of our intensive simulations possible.
DISCLOSURE
Drs. Robert Hillman and Daryush Mehta have a financial interest in InnoVoyce LLC, a company focused on
developing and commercializing technologies for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of voice-related disorders.
Dr. Hillman’s and Dr. Mehta’s interests were reviewed and are managed by Massachusetts General Hospital and Mass
General Brigham in accordance with their conflict-of-interest policies.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Mass General Brigham and Mass General are not allowed to give access to data without the Principal
Investigator (PI) for the human studies protocol first submitting a protocol amendment to request permission to share
the data with a specific collaborator on a case-by-case basis. This policy is based on strict rules dealing with the
protection of patient data and information. Anyone wishing to request access to the data used for comparing crossvalidation methods in a real-world clinical example section must contact Ms. Sarah DeRosa (sederosa@partners.org),
Program Coordinator for Research and Clinical Speech-Language Pathology, Center for Laryngeal Surgery and Voice
Rehabilitation, Massachusetts General Hospital.

The data used for Experiments 1–3 was generated using Monte Carlo simulations. Several MATLAB functions
associated with this manuscript are available. The latest version of the code can be retrieved from
https://github.com/GhasemzadehHamzeh/ML_PowerAnalysis.
The “Compute_RequiredSampleSize.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size of
the best features (D_0), and the number of selected features (l_0) as the input parameters and computes the required
number of pairs for having the statistical power for finding a statistically significant model (α = 0.05, 1−β = 0.8). This
code can also be used for unbalanced datasets; however, the estimated required sample size (𝑛𝑟 ) would be the average
of the number of negative and positive samples. The sample size of each class can then be computed using the
estimated average required sample size and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 . Specifically, the required sample size of the smaller class will be
2
2×𝛾𝐷𝑏
𝑛𝑟 ×
and the required sample size of the larger class will be 𝑛𝑟 ×
. Similarly, this code can also be used
1+𝛾𝐷𝑏

1+𝛾𝐷𝑏

for features with different effect sizes; the average of the effect sizes needs to be input as D_0.
The “Compute_RecommendedSampleSize.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size
of the best features (D_0), and the target value of 𝐶2,2 (CI_0) as the input parameters and computes the recommended
number of pairs for achieving the target value of 𝐶2,2 .
The “Compute_NestedModelConfidence.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size
of the best features (D_0), and the number of pairs in a dataset (n_0) as the input parameters and computes the value
of 𝐶2,2 .
The “Feature_Selection” toolbox provides an implementation of forward feature selection with four investigated
cross-validation approaches. Please, refer to the “Main_Test.m” file for examples of the usage of the code.
REFERENCES
Alharbi, S., Hasan, M., Simons, A. J. H., Brumfitt, S., & Green, P. (2020). Sequence labeling to detect
stuttering events in read speech. Computer Speech & Language, 62, 101052.
Arjmandi, M. K., & Pooyan, M. (2012). An optimum algorithm in pathological voice quality assessment
using wavelet-packet-based features, linear discriminant analysis and support vector machine.
Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, 7(1), 3–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2011.03.010
Arjmandi, M. K., Pooyan, M., Mikaili, M., Vali, M., & Moqarehzadeh, A. (2011). Identification of voice
disorders using long-time features and support vector machine with different feature reduction
methods. Journal of Voice, 25(6), e275–e289.
Armstrong, R., Symons, M., Scott, J. G., Arnott, W. L., Copland, D. A., McMahon, K. L., & Whitehouse,
A. J. O. (2018). Predicting language difficulties in middle childhood from early developmental
milestones: A comparison of traditional regression and machine learning techniques. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 61(8), 1926–1944.
Balki, I., Amirabadi, A., Levman, J., Martel, A. L., Emersic, Z., Meden, B., Garcia-Pedrero, A., Ramirez,
S. C., Kong, D., Moody, A. R., & others. (2019). Sample-size determination methodologies for
machine learning in medical imaging research: a systematic review. Canadian Association of
Radiologists Journal, 70(4), 344–353.
Bayerl, S. P., Wagner, D., Nöth, E., & Riedhammer, K. (2022). Detecting dysfluencies in stuttering
therapy using wav2vec 2.0. Interspeech, 2868–2872.
Berisha, V., Krantsevich, C., Hahn, P. R., Hahn, S., Dasarathy, G., Turaga, P., & Liss, J. (2021). Digital
medicine and the curse of dimensionality. NPJ Digital Medicine, 4(1), 153.
Bhat, G. S., Shankar, N., & Panahi, I. M. S. (2020). Automated machine learning based speech
classification for hearing aid applications and its real-time implementation on smartphone. 2020
42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society
(EMBC), 956–959.
Bing, D., Ying, J., Miao, J., Lan, L., Wang, D., Zhao, L., Yin, Z., Yu, L., Guan, J., & Wang, Q. (2018).
Predicting the hearing outcome in sudden sensorineural hearing loss via machine learning models.
Clinical Otolaryngology, 43(3), 868–874.

Cho, W. K., & Choi, S.-H. (2020). Comparison of convolutional neural network models for determination
of vocal fold normality in laryngoscopic images. Journal of Voice.
Cohen, J. (2013). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Academic press.
Cortés, J. P., Espinoza, V. M., Ghassemi, M., Mehta, D. D., Van Stan, J. H., Hillman, R. E., Guttag, J. V,
& Zanartu, M. (2018). Ambulatory assessment of phonotraumatic vocal hyperfunction using glottal
airflow measures estimated from neck-surface acceleration. PLoS One, 13(12), e0209017.
Crippa, A., Salvatore, C., Perego, P., Forti, S., Nobile, M., Molteni, M., & Castiglioni, I. (2015). Use of
machine learning to identify children with autism and their motor abnormalities. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 45, 2146–2156.
Donohue, C., Khalifa, Y., Mao, S., Perera, S., Sejdić, E., & Coyle, J. L. (2021). Characterizing swallows
from people with neurodegenerative diseases using high-resolution cervical auscultation signals and
temporal and spatial swallow kinematic measurements. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 64(9), 3416–3431.
Field, A., Miles, J., & Field, Z. (2012). Discovering statistics using R. Sage publications.
Figueroa, R. L., Zeng-Treitler, Q., Kandula, S., & Ngo, L. H. (2012). Predicting sample size required for
classification performance. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 12, 1–10.
Fritz, C. O., Morris, P. E., & Richler, J. J. (2012). Effect size estimates: current use, calculations, and
interpretation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(1), 2.
Ghasemzadeh, H. (2019a). Calibrated steganalysis of mp3stego in multi-encoder scenario. Information
Sciences, 480, 438–453.
Ghasemzadeh, H. (2019b). Multi-layer architecture for efficient steganalysis of UnderMp3Cover in
multiencoder scenario. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 14(1), 186–195.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2018.2847678
Ghasemzadeh, H., & Arjmandi, M. K. (2020). Toward Optimum Quantification of Pathology-induced
Noises: An Investigation of Information Missed by Human Auditory System. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 28, 519–528.
Ghasemzadeh, H., Deliyski, D. D., Hillman, R. E., & Mehta, D. D. (2021). Method for horizontal
calibration of laser-projection transnasal fiberoptic high-speed videoendoscopy. Applied Sciences,
11(2), 822. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11020822
Ghasemzadeh, H., Deliyski, D., Ford, D., Kobler, J. B., Hillman, R. E., & Mehta, D. D. (2020). Method
for Vertical Calibration of Laser-Projection Transnasal Fiberoptic High-Speed Videoendoscopy.
Journal of Voice, 34(6), 847–861.
Ghasemzadeh, H., Doyle, P. C., & Searl, J. (2022). Image representation of the acoustic signal: An
effective tool for modeling spectral and temporal dynamics of connected speech. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 152(1), 580–590.
Ghasemzadeh, H., & Searl, J. (2018). Modeling dynamics of connected speech in time and frequency
domains with application to ALS. 11th International Conference on Voice Physiology and
Biomechanics (ICVPB), August.
Ghasemzadeh, H., Tajik Khass, M., Khalil Arjmandi, M., & Pooyan, M. (2015). Detection of vocal
disorders based on phase space parameters and Lyapunov spectrum. Biomedical Signal Processing
and Control, 22, 135–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2015.07.002
Ghassemi, M., Van Stan, J. H., Mehta, D. D., Zañartu, M., Cheyne II, H. A., Hillman, R. E., & Guttag, J.
V. (2014). Learning to detect vocal hyperfunction from ambulatory neck-surface acceleration
features: Initial results for vocal fold nodules. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 61(6),
1668–1675.

Gómez, P., Schützenberger, A., Semmler, M., & Döllinger, M. (2018). Laryngeal pressure estimation with
a recurrent neural network. IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, 7,
1–11.
Hamed Mozaffari, M., & Lee, W.-S. (2019). Domain adaptation for ultrasound tongue contour extraction
using transfer learning: A deep learning approach. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
146(5), EL431–EL437.
Hawkins, D. M. (2004). The problem of overfitting. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer
Sciences, 44(1), 1–12.
Huang, G. B., Mattar, M., Berg, T., & Learned-Miller, E. (2008). Labeled faces in the wild: A database
for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments. Workshop on Faces in’RealLife’Images: Detection, Alignment, and Recognition.
Ibarra, E. J., Parra, J. A., Alzamendi, G. A., Cortés, J. P., Espinoza, V. M., Mehta, D. D., Hillman, R. E.,
& Zañartu, M. (2021). Estimation of subglottal pressure, vocal fold collision pressure, and intrinsic
laryngeal muscle activation from neck-surface vibration using a neural network framework and a
voice production model. Frontiers in Physiology, 1419.
Jones, S., Carley, S., & Harrison, M. (2003). An introduction to power and sample size estimation.
Emergency Medicine Journal: EMJ, 20(5), 453.
Kapoor, S., & Narayanan, A. (2022). Leakage and the reproducibility crisis in ML-based science. ArXiv
Preprint ArXiv:2207.07048.
Kist, A. M., Gómez, P., Dubrovskiy, D., Schlegel, P., Kunduk, M., Echternach, M., Patel, R., Semmler,
M., Bohr, C., Dürr, S., & others. (2021). A deep learning enhanced novel software tool for laryngeal
dynamics analysis. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 64(6), 1889–1903.
Krstajic, D., Buturovic, L. J., Leahy, D. E., & Thomas, S. (2014). Cross-validation pitfalls when selecting
and assessing regression and classification models. Journal of Cheminformatics, 6(1), 1–15.
Le, D., Licata, K., Persad, C., & Provost, E. M. (2016). Automatic assessment of speech intelligibility for
individuals with aphasia. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
24(11), 2187–2199.
Lenatti, M., Moreno-Sánchez, P. A., Polo, E. M., Mollura, M., Barbieri, R., & Paglialonga, A. (2022).
Evaluation of machine learning algorithms and explainability techniques to detect hearing loss from
a speech-in-noise screening test. American Journal of Audiology, 31(3S), 961–979.
Liu, X., Faes, L., Kale, A. U., Wagner, S. K., Fu, D. J., Bruynseels, A., Mahendiran, T., Moraes, G.,
Shamdas, M., Kern, C., & others. (2019). A comparison of deep learning performance against
health-care professionals in detecting diseases from medical imaging: a systematic review and metaanalysis. The Lancet Digital Health, 1(6), e271–e297.
Lowry, R. (2014). Concepts and applications of inferential statistics.
Marcot, B. G., & Hanea, A. M. (2021). What is an optimal value of k in k-fold cross-validation in discrete
Bayesian network analysis? Computational Statistics, 36(3), 2009–2031.
Matikolaie, F. S., & Tadj, C. (2022). Machine learning-based cry diagnostic system for identifying septic
newborns. Journal of Voice.
Mehta, D. D., Van Stan, J. H., Zañartu, M., Ghassemi, M., Guttag, J. V, Espinoza, V. M., Cortés, J. P.,
Cheyne, H. A., & Hillman, R. E. (2015). Using ambulatory voice monitoring to investigate common
voice disorders: Research update. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 3, 155.
Menard, S. (2002). Applied logistic regression analysis (Issue 106). Sage.

Mielens, J. D., Hoffman, M. R., Ciucci, M. R., McCulloch, T. M., & Jiang, J. J. (2012). Application of
classification models to pharyngeal high-resolution manometry.
Oleson, J. J., Brown, G. D., & McCreery, R. (2019). The evolution of statistical methods in speech,
language, and hearing sciences. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 62(3), 498–
506.
Ossewaarde, R., Jonkers, R., Jalvingh, F., & Bastiaanse, R. (2020). Quantifying the Uncertainty of
Parameters Measured in Spontaneous Speech of Speakers With Dementia. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 63(7), 2255–2270.
Panayotov, V., Chen, G., Povey, D., & Khudanpur, S. (2015). Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public
domain audio books. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 5206–5210.
Parvandeh, S., Yeh, H.-W., Paulus, M. P., & McKinney, B. A. (2020). Consensus features nested crossvalidation. Bioinformatics, 36(10), 3093–3098.
Qayyum, A., Qadir, J., Bilal, M., & Al-Fuqaha, A. (2020). Secure and robust machine learning for
healthcare: A survey. IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 14, 156–180.
Sagi, O., & Rokach, L. (2018). Ensemble learning: A survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 8(4), e1249.
Shen, L., Kann, B. H., Taylor, R. A., & Shung, D. L. (2021). The Clinician’s Guide to the Machine
Learning Galaxy. Frontiers in Physiology, 12, 658583.
Thabtah, F., & Peebles, D. (2020). A new machine learning model based on induction of rules for autism
detection. Health Informatics Journal, 26(1), 264–286.
Theodoridis, S., & Koutroumbas, K. (2009). Pattern recognition. In Elsevier Inc (fourth).
Tsanas, A., Little, M. A., McSharry, P. E., Spielman, J., & Ramig, L. O. (2012). Novel speech signal
processing algorithms for high-accuracy classification of Parkinson’s disease. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, 59(5), 1264–1271.
Uhm, T., Lee, J. E., Yi, S., Choi, S. W., Oh, S. J., Kong, S. K., Lee, I. W., & Lee, H. M. (2021). Predicting
hearing recovery following treatment of idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss with machine
learning models. American Journal of Otolaryngology, 42(2), 102858.
Vabalas, A., Gowen, E., Poliakoff, E., & Casson, A. J. (2019). Machine learning algorithm validation with
a limited sample size. PloS One, 14(11), e0224365.
Van Stan, J. H., Burns, J., Hron, T., Zeitels, S., Panuganti, B. A., Purnell, P. R., Mehta, D. D., Hillman,
R. E., & Ghasemzadeh, H. (2023). Detecting Mild Phonotrauma in Daily Life. The Laryngoscope.
Van Stan, J. H., Mehta, D. D., Ortiz, A. J., Burns, J. A., Toles, L. E., Marks, K. L., Vangel, M., Hron, T.,
Zeitels, S., & Hillman, R. E. (2020). Differences in weeklong ambulatory vocal behavior between
female patients with phonotraumatic lesions and matched controls. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 63(2), 372–384.
Varoquaux, G., Raamana, P. R., Engemann, D. A., Hoyos-Idrobo, A., Schwartz, Y., & Thirion, B. (2017).
Assessing and tuning brain decoders: cross-validation, caveats, and guidelines. NeuroImage, 145,
166–179.
Vieira, F. G., Venugopalan, S., Premasiri, A. S., McNally, M., Jansen, A., McCloskey, K., Brenner, M.
P., & Perrin, S. (2022). A machine-learning based objective measure for ALS disease severity. NPJ
Digital Medicine, 5(1), 1–9.
Viering, T., & Loog, M. (2022). The shape of learning curves: a review. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence.

Wang, J., Green, J. R., Samal, A., & Yunusova, Y. (2013). Articulatory distinctiveness of vowels and
consonants: A data-driven approach. Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 1539–1551.
Wang, J., Samal, A., Rong, P., & Green, J. R. (2016). An optimal set of flesh points on tongue and lips
for speech-movement classification. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 59(1),
15–26.
Wong, P. C. M., Lai, C. M., Chan, P. H. Y., Leung, T. F., Lam, H. S., Feng, G., Maggu, A. R., & Novitskiy,
N. (2021). Neural speech encoding in infancy predicts future language and communication
difficulties. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 30(5), 2241–2250.
Yousef, A. M., Deliyski, D. D., Zacharias, S. R. C., & Naghibolhosseini, M. (2022). Detection of vocal
fold image obstructions in high-speed videoendoscopy during connected speech in adductor
spasmodic dysphonia: A convolutional neural networks approach. Journal of Voice.
Zhang, Z. (2020). Estimation of vocal fold physiology from voice acoustics using machine learning. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 147(3), EL264–EL270.

Appendix:

Figure A1. The effect of an unbalanced dataset (e.g., unequal number of patients and controls) on the estimation
error of the minimum required sample size when Equations 4–7 were used to estimate (A) the size of the smaller
class and (B) an adjusted sample size, where the adjusted sample size was defined as the average of the sample sizes
of the positive and negative classes. Please refer to the generalization of the results section for further details.

Figure A2. The effect of having two features with unequal discriminative power on the estimation error of the
minimum required sample size when Equations 4–7 were used with (A) the smaller effect size (𝐷0 = 𝐷) and (B) the
(𝛾 +1)
average discriminatory power of the two features (𝐷0 = 𝐷 𝐷 ). Please refer to the generalization of the results
2
section for further details.

Figure A3. Bull’s eye non-linear feature space: (A) with low level of noise (noise level = 2) (B) with high level of
noise (noise level = 4). Please refer to the generalization of the results section for further details.

TABLES:

Number of pairs (n)

Table A1. Effect of different parameters on the probability of both selected features to be correct (𝐶2,2 ) when m = 10 or 20 features were
extracted.

50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500

0.4
17.7
38.2
52.7
63.4
72.9
79.6
84.7
88.1
90.3
92.6

Discriminatory power (D), m = 10
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
27.9 40.3 50.2 60.8 68.6
51.7 66.9 78.3 85.6 90.9
69.3 81.4 90.3 94.7 97.2
79.7 90.1 95.7 98.7 99.5
88.3 95.9 98.5 99.6 99.9
90.5 96.6 99.1 99.6 99.7
94.5 98.6 99.7 99.9 100
96.1 99.1 99.8 100
100
97.3 99.6 100
100
100
98.6 99.9 100
100
100

1
75.1
94.2
98.4
99.8
100
99.9
100
100
100
100

0.4
9.5
23.8
39.5
51.3
63.3
73.4
79
84.1
88.1
90.3

Discriminatory power (D), m = 20
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
17.3 27
37.4 48.7 59.4
40.1 55.7 68
79
85.8
59.5 75
86.3 92.6 96.5
71.5 85.8 93.5 96
98.6
83.2 92.5 96.8 99.2 99.7
88.4 96.9 99.1 99.7 100
92
97.5 99.4 99.8 100
94.9 99
99.8 100
100
96.8 99.2 99.9 100
100
97.6 99.7 99.9 100
100

1
65.5
90.6
98
99.4
99.8
100
99.9
100
100
100

Number of pairs (n)

Table A2. Effect of different parameters on the probability of both selected features to be correct (𝐶2,2 ) when m = 30 or 40 features were
extracted.

50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500

0.4
6.3
19.3
32.6
48.4
56.8
66.1
75.8
81.2
84.8
86.9

Discriminatory power (D), m = 30
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
11.9 19.7 31.5 40.9 50.7
35.3 52.3 67.5 77.6 85.4
53.6 70.6 83.7 90.5 94.7
69.8 84.5 92.3 96.6 98.8
77.5 90.6 96.3 98.7 99.5
84
94.2 97.9 99.3 99.8
89.8 96.5 99.4 99.9 100
94.1 98.7 99.8 100
100
95.7 98.9 99.7 100
100
96.5 99.5 100
100
100

1
59.7
90.1
97.7
99.4
99.9
100
100
100
100
100

0.4
4.8
15.1
29.2
41.8
53.3
63.1
70.8
76.1
82.9
86.8

Discriminatory power (D), m = 40
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10.3 16.6 26.5 38.2 48.2
31.7 46.3 60.9 72.8 81.2
50.3 67.5 81
89.8 94.4
66.8 82.4 91.4 95.4 98.4
74.1 89.3 95.4 98.3 99.5
81.6 93
98
99.4 99.8
89.1 95.4 98.8 99.6 99.8
91.2 97.8 99.4 99.9 99.9
94.9 98.8 99.7 100
100
97.3 99.6 99.9 100
100

1
57.5
87.8
97.6
99.4
100
100
100
100
100
100

Description of supplemental files:
The “Compute_RequiredSampleSize.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size of
the best features (D_0), and the number of selected features (l_0) as the input parameters and computes the required
number of pairs for having the statistical power for finding a statistically significant model (α = 0.05, 1−β = 0.8). This
code can also be used for unbalanced datasets; however, the estimated required sample size (𝑛𝑟 ) would be the average
of the number of negative and positive samples. The sample size of each class can then be computed using the
estimated average required sample size and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 . Specifically, the required sample size of the smaller class will be
2
2×𝛾𝐷𝑏
𝑛𝑟 ×
and the required sample size of the larger class will be 𝑛𝑟 ×
. Similarly, this code can also be used
1+𝛾𝐷𝑏

1+𝛾𝐷𝑏

for features with different effect sizes; the average of the effect sizes needs to be input as D_0.
The “Compute_RecommendedSampleSize.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size
of the best features (D_0), and the target value of 𝐶2,2 (CI_0) as the input parameters and computes the recommended
number of pairs for achieving the target value of 𝐶2,2 .
The “Compute_NestedModelConfidence.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size
of the best features (D_0), and the number of pairs in a dataset (n_0) as the input parameters and computes the value
of 𝐶2,2 .
The “Feature_Selection” toolbox provides an implementation of forward feature selection with four investigated
cross-validation approaches. Please, refer to the “Main_Test.m” file for examples of the usage of the code.
