Articulatory interpretation of the "singing formant"
Johan Sundberg
Department of SpeechCommunication,Royal Institute of Technology(KTH). S-100 44 Stockholm 70, Sweden
(Received 3 December 1973; revised10 January 1974)

The "singingformant" is a high spectrumenvelopepeak near 2.8 kHz
characteristicof vowel soundsproducedin male Westernopera and concert
singing.An acousticalmodel of the vocal tract is capableof generatingsuch a
peak provided that three conditionsare met: (i) The cross-sectional
area in the
pharynx must be at least six times wider than that of the larynx tube opening.If
so, the larynx tube is acousticallymismatchedwith the rest of the vocal tract,
and an extra formant is added to the vocal tract transfer function. (2) The sinus
Morgagni must be wide in relation to the rest of the larynx tube. This may tune
the frequencyof the extra formant to a value betweenthe frequenciesof the third
and fourth formantsin normal speech.(3) The sinuspiriformesmust be wide.
This reducesthe frequencyof the fifth formant to about 3 kHz. X-ray studiesof
a raised and lowered larynx showedthat these three conditionsmay be fulfilled
when the larynx is lowered.Thus, the larynx lowering,typical of male
professionalsinging,seemsto explain the "singingformant" and other formant
frequencydifferencesbetweennormal speechand male professionalsinging.

Subject Classification: 70.20; 75.70.

INTRODUCTION

"singing formant" in terms of formants only we have to
assume an extraordinary density of the higher formants.
Spectrographic measurements on various vowels in four

The "singing formant" or the "2.8 kHz" belongs to •he
acoustical characteristics of professional male singing
in Western opera and concert performances. Rather independent of vowel quality and pitch, it appears as a re-

professional bass singers yielded the average formant

frequencyvaluesgiven in Fig. 2. 4 For comparison,
mean values observed by Fant et al. in normal male

gionof highspectralenergynear 3 kHz. ' A typicalex-

speechare givenin the samefigure.s Analysesof later-

ample is given in Fig. 1, displaying a spectrum level
difference of approximately 20 dB between a spoken and

al x-ray pictures and photos of the lip opening taken during vowel phonation in speech and singing suggested ar-

a sung[u]. The spectrumenvelopepeakis frequently

ticulatory interpretations of the formant frequency differences as regards the three lowest formants: In singing as compared with speech the larynx was lowered, the
jaw opening increased, the tongue tip was advanced in
the back vowels, and the lips were excessively protruded

accompanied by an envelope minimum slightly higher in
frequency and often clearly discernible in the spectrogram.

How can such a "singing formant" be generated acoustically ? If •vo or more formants approach each other in

in front vowels. The purpose of the present paper is to
suggest an articulatory explanation for the frequencies
of the fourth and fifth formants in singing.

frequencythe formantlevels will rise. 2 In our previous
research, attempts were made to match spectra of vowels

sungby male opera singerson a formant synthesizer.a
These experiments showed that five formants below 4
kHz or even 3 kHz have to be postulated in order to generate a "singing formant" with formants only. In normal

I. ANATOMY
It can be assumed

male speech the frequency of the fifth formant lies
•round 4.5 kHz. Therefore, when we interpret the

that an acoustic

feature

such as the

"singing formant," which is rather independent of vowel
quality, stems from a region of the vocal tract that is

VOWEL [u]

SPEECH

SING NG

0

FIG. 1. Spectra of the vowel [u]
spoken (tell) and sung (right) by a
professional bass singer.

- 10
-20

-30

-30

-/,0

-/-0

-50

-50

'
0

838

J. AcoustSoc.Am., Vol. 55, No. 4, April 1974

I

2

3

k•tz

Copyright¸ 1974 by the Acoustical
Societyof America

838

ownloaded 28 Mar 2011 to 130.237.67.192. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/journals/doc/ASALIB-home/info/terms.js

839

J. Sundherg:Singingformant

839

II. ACOUSTIC

FORMANTFREOUENCIES
IN SINGING AND NORMAL SPEECH

INTERPRETATION

The acoustical effects of the sinus Morgagni and piriformes have been studied in several investigations. On
the average good voices have been found to possess

larger sinusMorgagnithanpoorvoices.e Studying
sound
generated by excised larynges with and without cotton in
the sinus Morgagni, Beckmann found reason to doubt that
the sinus Morgagni can have any major effects on the
voice timbre in singers. His spectral analyses, however,

were notextended
beyond2 kHz.9 vandenBerg concludes, on the basis of theoretical considerations, that
the sinus Morgagni acts as a low-pass filter, thus sup-

pressinghigherharmonics.
•0 Fantdemonstrated
by ex0.5

periments on an electrical analog of the vocal tract that
the sinus Morgagni is of importance to the fourth for-

F•

mant frequency, and that the sinus piriformes contribute
to the effective length of the pharynx. Also, he found a
cutoff frequency near 5 kHz associated with the piriform
pockets. His observations were made for a single area
function corresponding to the articulation of a neutral

0

[u:] (o4 (o:] (•:]
VOWEL

[e:] [1:] [y:] (u:] (oQ
(IPA

FIG. 2. Formant fr•uencies

SY•OOLS)

• long •ish

vowels in norm•

m•e speech(dashedlines) andin p•fessio•l

male singing

(solid lines).

comparatively unaffected by the articulatory maneuvers
required to keep vowels acoustically distinct. Such a
region is the pharyngeal cavity system below the epiglottis. The anatomy of this system can be described as
follows.

The vocal

chords

constitute

the bottom

of a

small tube with a length of about 2 cm in male subjects.
This tube is called the larynx tube. At the bottom of this
tube there is a small cavity, the sinus Morgagni, or the
laryngeal ventricle. The larynx tube is vertically and
excentrically inserted into the larger pl•'ynx tuSe, which
is closed off in its low end by the esophagus mouth at the
level of the vocal chords approximately.
The lowest end
of the pharynx tube is thus surrounding the larynx tube
and is divided into two pockets, one left and one right.
These pockets are called the sinus pirif•rmes.

vowel (see Ref. 6, pp. 102 fl. ). Later on, Flach and
Schwickardie performed some experiments filling

the sinuspiriformeswith cottonin living subjects.•'
Their method and conclusions were criticized by Merreelstein, who found theoretical suppert for expecting
that closing off these pockets would not have any major
acoustic effect below 4 kHz. n
In view of these diverging results a systematical investigation appears to be needed. In the present investigation experimental data were collected from an acoustical

model

III.

MODEL

of the vocal

tract.

The model consisted of a cylindrical brass tube with a
diameter

of 3. ! cm.

The tube was closed

off at one end

by a plug into which holes were drilled to simulate the
larynx tube and the sinus piriformes. A constriction of

6-cm length, 1-cm2 cross-sectionalarea, andcontinuLARYNX

It can be assumed that the geometry of these cavities
is affected by the larynx height. Therefore lateral and
frontal tomograms were taken when a singer phonated the

HIGH

LO•

vowels[G]and[i] with raisedandloweredlarynx, Tracings of the iomograms that showed the largest dimensions of the sinus Morgagni and the sinus piriformis are
given in Fig. 3. A larynx lowering seems to be associated with two major effects: the sinus Morgagni and the
sinus plriformes are both expanded. An additional effect
not seen in the figure is of course an increase in the total
length of the vocal tract. It appears that these observations agree with what has previously been observed to

characterize "covered"singing.8 It is also observed
that the size of the sinus piriformes

seems to be smaller

in [a] thanin [i] in the caseof raised larynx. This suggests that the size of the sinus.piriformes may be dependent upon the vowel in the case of nontowered larynx.
This would support the assumption proposed by Fant to
explain the low value of the first formant frequency in an

FIG. 3. Tracings of frontal and lateral tomograms (left and
right in each pair. respectively) of the larynx in high (left pairs)

[a] whichwas observedin the case of an area function
that includedthe sinuspitiformes. 7

(upper series) and [i] (lower series). [The tomograms were
taken by Dr. M. Hayerling. Karolinska Sjukhuset. Sœockholm.]

and low (right pairs) positionduring phonationof the vowel [•]

J. Acoust.Soc.Am., Vol. 55, No. 4, April 1974

wnloaded 28 Mar 2011 to 130.237.67.192. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/journals/doc/ASALIB-home/info/terms.

840

J. Sundberg:
Singingformant

840

ously variable position could be introduced into the large
tube.

The

transfer

function

of the model

was

measured

using the STL-Ionophone as a sound source. It was
adapted at the bottom of the cavity simulating the larynx
tube. This sound source behaves like a point source pro-

theresonators
areacoustically
uncoupled•5:
Alo•-0.48 ß(Ao)t/a [1- 1.25 (Aa/A•,)tla].

(2)

This equation was found to give values that agreed within

1% with the resonancefrequencymeasuredin the case of

viding constant volume velocity and possessing an almost
infinitely high inner acoustic impedance. It consists of
a discharge between two fine electrodes loaded with a
high dc voltage. By modulating this voltage sound is generated that is analogous to the modulating signal. The
frequency characteristic of the STL-Ionophone is linear

a small tube centricaily inserted into a larger tube.
When applied to excentric tubes the calculated end correction is slightly too long, as stated by Ingard. The
length correction for the twin-tube model of the larynx

from the infra- to the ultrasoundregion.t• The fre-

2.5 kHz approximately by applying Eqs. 1 and 2 to the
twin-tube model of the larynx tube. This value is slightly too low since the estimated end correction is some-

quency response of the model was recorded by a level
recorder with a filter frequency synchronized with the
modulation frequency.

IV.

LARYNX

tube mentioned above is 0. 2 cm if Ap is assumed to be

4 cm2. The resonancefrequencywas calculatedto be

what too long because of the excentered position of the
larynx tube in the pharynx. However, is seems reason-

TUBE

From the tomograms traced in Fig. 3 estLmates were
made of the dimensions of the larynx tube in the lower
position. On the assumption of elliptical shapes in all
directions the following estimates were obtained.

able to assume that the larynx tube considered is capable
of resonating at a frequency below 3 kHz. Therefore,
the larynx tube can be expected to add an extra formant
tuned to a frequency located between the frequencies of
the formants that in normal speech are referred to as
the third

The

sinusMorgagnicontainedan air volumeof 0. 56 cm• and
had a vertical length of 0.4 cm. The rest of the larynx
tube was 2.2 cm long and had a cross-sectional area of

0.52 cmz on the average. In a first approximation
we
may regard this larynx tube as a twin-tube resona•r.

The upper tube in that system would have a length of 2.2
cm and a cross-sectional area of 0.52 cm•. The corresponding measures for the lower tube would be 0.4 cm

and1.4 cm2, respectively.
A small tube such as the larynx tube inserted into a
larger tube such as the pharynx tube will act as a separate resonator provided that the ratio between the crosssectional area of the larger tube and the opening area of

the smaller tube exceeds 6:1. •4 This condition would be
met by the larynx tube under consideration if the pharyngeal cross-sectional area at the level of the larynx tube

openingis greater than6x 0.52 = 3.1 cm2. It seemsper-

and the fourth.

The area of the larynx tube opening has been observed

to increasewith risingvoicepitch.is The area of the
larynx tube opening is important for two reasons. First,
it determines whether or not the larynx tube will behave
as a separate resonator. Second, an increase in this
area will tend to raise the resonance frequency of the

larynxtube. An opening
of 1.5 cm• requiresa pharyngeal cross-sectionalarea of at least 9 cm2 if the larynx
tube is to act as a separate. resonator. It seems likely
that this condition can be met if the larynx is lowered.
If so, a larynx lowering would be particularly important
during high-pitched singing. The effect on the resonance
frequency of an expansion of the larynx tube opening may
be compensated for by an increase in the cross-sectional
area near the closed end, i.e., by an expansion of the
sinus Morgagni. The volume required in order to keep

fectiy safe to assume that this is the case, particularly

the resonance frequency at 2.8 kHz for different values
of the opening area was measured in the model. The

since the pharynx appears to be widened durir• larynxlowering, as indicated in Fig. 3. Consequently, in sing-

trically inserted into a larger tube (diameter: 3.1 cm)

ing with the larynx lowered, the larynx tube can be expected to act as a separate resonator capable of adding
an extra

formant

to the transfer

function

of the vocal

tract.

The resonance frequency of a twin-tube system can be

calculatedusingan equationgivenby Fant (seeRef. 7,
p. 65). H A• andAo are the cross-sectionalareas, and
ls• and l 0 are the lengihs of the lower (wider) andupper
(narrower) tubes, respectively, the resonancewill occur
at a frequency f which satisfies the condition

As•.
•I 2•f(lø
+•o)f• 2nf
l• =1,
A0
c
c

(1)

where c is the speed of sound propagation.

The effective length of the upper tube is I o+ Al 0. The
end correction Alo depends on the termination of the
narrow

tube.

If the twin-tube

is inserted

into a wide tube

of cross-sectional area A•, and A•, >6Ao, Alo can be calculated using a formula given by Ingard, provided that

larynx tube was simulated by a twin-tube model excenthat simulated the pharynx and mouth cavities. The
length of the lower tube was varied so as to give the resonance at 2.8 kHz. The results are given in Fig. 4. The
calculated values were obtained from Eqs. 1 and 2. It
is seen from the figure that the calculated volumes are

slightly smaller than the observed. Presumably, this is
an effect

of the overestimation

of the end correction

the larynx tube opening owing to the excentricity.

of

Ac-

cordingto the measureddata, a volumeof 0.9 cms would
be requiredfor a larynxtubeopeningarea (A0)of 1.1
cmz combinedwith a sinusMorgagniwith a cross-sectional area(A•) of 2.01 cm2. This seemsto be a rather moderate increase of the volume of 0. 56 cmSestimated
in the tomograms.
It seems likely that some increase of the sinus Morgagni volume is achieved automatically when pitch is raised because of the length increase in the stretehed vocal folds. It is also likely that

an extra lowering of the larynx is capable of stretching
the larynx somewhat in the vertical direction. The •_at.a
given in Fig. 4 seem to support the assumption that the

J. Acou•t.Soc.Am., VoL 55, No. 4, April 1974

ownloaded 28 Mar 2011 to 130.237.67.192. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/journals/doc/ASALIB-home/info/terms.js

a41

J. Sundbe•g:
Singing
formant

s41

only one instead of beth pockets has a small effect. The
zero appears somewhere between 3 and 4 kHz for a
pocket depth of 2 cm. Recalling that a spectrum envelope

OI:•Ne'•G
A,•IEA
(Ao)FO•
A•-2ma•2(cr•)

minimum often can be observed in this frequency region
in spectra of sung vowels, we can suggest that this minimum probably stems from the sinus pitiformes.
The sinus piriformes also affect the formant frequencies.

•0,2
FIG. 4.

•

C,lU.
CUC•E
0
volume • sinus Morg•

v•ues • the l•

r•red

for va•ous

tube ope•ng area A 0 in order • keep the

resonance of •e la•

tube at 2.8 kHz.

The parameer

the c•ss-sectional •ea of the sinusMo•agni A•.
sured da•

were

•n•

f•m

an acoustical

Provided that the area raUo between the larynx

tube opening and the pharynx tube is smaller than 1:6,
the sinus piriformes can be expected to be equivalent to
a length increase of the pharynx. Those formant fre-

m•el

is

•e

mea-

of the vocal

quencies will drop in particular which correspond to
standing wave resonances in the pharynx tube, e.g., the
second formant in front vowels. Thus we may expect
that the sinus pitiformes affect the formant frequencies
in a manner that depends on the articulation, i.e., the
location

of a constriction

of the vocal

tract.

tract.

The effect of varying the location of a constriction(see
Sec. IH) was studiedexperimentallyin the model. The
larynx tube acts as an acoustically mismatched, and
hence separate, resonator and is thus capable of adding
an extra

formant

at 2.8 kHz to the normal

vocal tract

transfer function in sh-ging.
In addition to the effect of generating an extra formant,
an acoustical mismatch between the larynx and the
pharynx will also tend to raise the frequencies of the

lower formants (seeRef. 7). However, as will be shown
below, this effect is counteracted by the influence of the

sinus piriformes and the lengtheningof the vocal tract
which axe two other effects of a lowering of the larynx.
V. SINUS PIRIFORMES

The dimensions of the sinus piriformes were estimated
from the tomograms traced in Fig. 3 under conditions of lowered larynx. In the tomograms the pockets
were found to possess a length of about 2 cm and a cross-

resonance frequency of the larynx tube was tuned to approximately 2.8 kHz before the constriction was inserted
into the tube. The area function of the larynx tube was
then kept constant in all measurements giving the results
shown in Fig. 6. The effect of adding the sinus pitiformes canbe described as follows. The fifth formant fre-

quency drops considerably for certain locations of the
constriction. The fourth is essentiaily unaffected, as can
be expected in view of the acoustical mismatch between
its resonator and the pharynx tube. The third formant
frequency drops slightly and the second is lowered particularly in cases of fronted constriction. The effect on
the first formant frequency is rather small.
A lowering of the larynx not only expands the sinus
piritorraes, but also increases the physical length of the

pharynx tube. This length increase will expectediy reinforce the effect of introducing the sinus pitiformes.
This
is because of the fact that adding the sinus piriformes

sectionalarea between1 and2 cm2oSucha pair of cavities will resonate at a frequency of

!= c/4- l,,

(3)

where f is the resonance frequency, c is the speed of
soundpropagation, and la is the effective length of the
tube. At the resonance frequency the sound fed into the

vocal tract will be absorbedby the sinus pitiformes
which will give a zero in the transfer function and hence
a minimum in the spectral envelope. Zero frequencies

were calculated for cress-sectionai areas (A) and lengths

(l) of the sinuspiriformes, using

l• =l +O.7 (A/•r)z/•-.

(4)

Experimental data were provided by the model. The
sinus piriformes were simulated by one or two cylindrical tubes of systematically

IO

t,,S

2,0

DEPTH OF SINUS PIRIFORNIIS(cm)

varied len•d•s and diameters

inserted in parailel to the larynx tube into the closed end
of a wider tube simulating the pharynx anci the mouth.

In Fig. 5 the calculateddata and measuredvalues can be
compared.

0,5

Note that the main determinant

for the zero

frequency is the depth of the pockets whilst their crosssectional area is less import•tnt. Moreover, simulating

FIG. 5. Frequency of the transfer function zero stemming
from various types of cavities simulating the sinus pitiformes
in the acoustical model.. The cross-sectional area of the sinus
pirfformes was 1.2 and 3.5 cm2 (crosses and dots, respectively).

The circled crosses show values obtained with two

tubesof 1.2-cm2 cross-sectionalarea. The solid lines give the

calculated
values
[/= c/41e,is=
1+0.7(A/•r)
112].

J. Acoust Soc. Am., Vol. 55, No. 4. Alxil 1974

wnloaded 28 Mar 2011 to 130.237.67.192. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/journals/doc/ASALIB-home/info/terms.

842

J. Sundberg:Singingformant

842

of the sinus pitiformes is counteracted when the sinus
Morgagni is expanded and [-he frequency of the third for-

mant is raised. This rise is typical for sungback vowels,

andit canbe ascribedto the more frontedtonguetip.
The maximum gain in spectrum amplitude around 3 kHz
is about 20 dB. This value agrees with the initially ob-

served differencebetweena spokenanda sung[u]. The
conclusion therefore seems justified that a singer is
capable of generating a "singing formant" by adjusting
his sinus Morgagni, sinus pitiformes, and in the back

vowels, the location of his tongue tip. Except for the
tongue tip movement these effects are presumably
secondary consequences of a lowering of [he larynx.
Vl.
3

6

7

9

11

DISTANCECONSTRICTION
CEHTER-OPENEND (cm)

FIG.

6.

model

of the vocal

Formant frequency values observed in an acoustical
tract

as a function

of the location

of a con-

striction. Dotted lines: without simulation of sinus pirfformes.
Squares: with simulation of sinus piriformes.
$oli•t lines:
simulation of sinus pirfformes and lengthening of the pharynx
tube by 1.5 cm.

can be interpreted as an increased pharynx length. This
assumption is confirmed by the experimentai data given
m Fig. 6. Note, however• that the length increase appears to reduce the variability of the fifth formant frequency quite considerably: it keeps a value close to 3
kHz in all articulations

except one.

The summed effects on the form•mt frequencies of introducing the sinus piriformes and of increasing the pharynx leng• are rather similar to the differences observed

in the formant frequencies in speechand singing (cf.
Figs. 2 and 6). In both cases we observe a fourth formant frequency essentially unaffected by the articulation,
a fifth formant that is constantly.tow in frequency, and a
second formant that drops considerably under conditions
of fronted

constriction.

Differences

DISCUSSION

13

occur

Our results suggest that a singer is able to produce a
vowel with a "singing formant" using his vocal chords
and vocal tract exclusively.
Given the explanation suggested above, there is no motivation to postulate "chest

resonance," "head resonance," "singing in the mask,"
etc., i.e., they appear to lack acoustical relevance for
the tone. On the other hand, these terms play a predominant role in current vocal pedagogy. The reason for
this might be that these terms describe patterns of vibration sensaUons that appear only when the tone is properly produced. Perhaps recognizing the vibrations accompanying good tones is an efficient way to control vocal production.

From the acoustical point of view it is essential for
the generation of the "singing formant" that the larynx
tube act as a separate resonator the resonance of which
is not a/fected by articulatory movements in the rest of
the vocal tract. This is accomplished when the larynx
tube opening is less than one-sixth of the cross-sec-

tionai area in the pharynx. AFdculatdrily,

this effect is

obtainedby loweringthe lary/•x whichwidensthe pharynx
cavity. Particulariy at higher pitches where the larynx
tube opening is wide it would be essential to acqmre a
wide pharynx. It was mentioned that an increase in pitch

in the first

formant frequency, which drops in the model experiments
but is slightly higher in singing than in speech. This
discrepancy is probably explained by the fact that the jaw
opening tends to be larger in singing than in speech, since
a wide jaw opening tends to raise the first formant fre-

EFFECT ON SPECTRUM ENVELOPE 01: SIHUS PIRIFORMIS

ARTICULATION:
[u]
A

•

3O

quency.•v Anotherdiscrepancyis the behaviorof the
third formant, which• however, can be explained by the
sensitivity which this formant exhibits to the position of
the tongue tip. Therefore, the experiments seem to
suggest that the formant frequency differences observed
between spoken and sung vowels can to a large extent be
explained with reference to changes in the pharynx and
larynx tubes associated with a lowering of the larynx.

Shifts in formant frequencies are accompanied by aiternLions of the spectrum envelope. Measured changes
in the spectrum envelope due to the presence of a wide

sinus Morgagai, the sinus piriformes,

and to a rise in

[he third formant frequency can be studied in Fig. 7.
The values were obtained from the model sLmulating an

articulationsimilar to that of an [u]. The daxnping
effect
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Voh 55, No. 4, April 1974

-

- "-•-.-•-_•:.o---o'

FIG. ?. Spect•

,"

-.

,

,

FREQUENCY

(kHz)

enve[o•

c•es

sinus p[•Eo;mis (s. p. ), sinus •o•;a•

due • the int•d•c•[on

o•

(s.M.), end • •sed

an acoustic m•el • the vocal tract including •o
so as • sim•a/e the artic•ation of a •
[u].

•t•etions

.

ownloaded 28 Mar 2011 to 130.237.67.192. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/journals/doc/ASALIB-home/info/terms.js

843

J. Sundberg:
Singinfl
formant

843

suggests. The reasonfor Beckmann'snegativeresults

is associated with an increase of the larynx tube opening. This increase has to be compensatedfor by a widening of the sinus Morgagni if the larynx tube resonance

as regards the acoustical effect of the laryngeal ventricle seems to be that his spectrum analysis was not ex-

is to remain at 2.8 kHz.

tendedbeyond2 kHz.9 As hasbeendemonstrated
above,

A contribution to the widening

required is provided by the stretching of the vocai folds

effectscanbe expectedaround2.5 kHz. Also, filling a

constituting the bottom of the sinus Morgagni. But probably additional compensation is required as well. If so,
the singer will have to lower his larynx more and more
the higher the tones he sings. This agrees with the commoniy stated need for "covering" high notes, since covering has been shown to be associated with phenomena
similar to the effects observed in larynx lowering.

cavity with cotton does not mean that it is acoustically
"ausgeschaltet." This fact has already been pointed out
by Mermelstein in his criticism of Finch and Schwickar-

There are great individual differences as regards the
dimensions of the vocal chords, the sinus Morgagm, and
the sinus piriformes. We may concinde from the present investigations that a good singer needs a large sinus
Morgagni and a wide pharynx. This conclusion may explain the predominance of large sinus Morgagni in

singersobservedby Finch.s
According to Finch, the sinus Morgagni in females is

males than in females. Bartholome•r t has observed that
soprano voices frequently lack a "singing formant" in
their higher range. In view of our results we may assume that the acoustical mismatch between the pharynx
and larynx tubes cannotbe maintained in the upper range
of a soprano. Under these conditions, no "singing formant" is likely to be produced.
Professional singers seem to adopt a special vowel
articulation in singing with the result that a "singing formant" is generated. This suggests that this spectrum
envetope peak is desirable.
At the same time this cannot be the case in high-pitehed female singin_g. The reason for this dissimilarity probably lies in a perceptual
function of the "singing formant."
A long-time-average
spectrum of a symphony orchestra has a peak around

450 Hz and a slope of about - 10 dB/octave abovethis

frequency.Thus, the "singingformant"is locatedin'a
frequency region where the average soundpressure level
of an orchestral soundhas dropped more than 20 dB bevaiue.

This

to the acoustical effect of the sinus piriformes are not
supported by our findings. The reason for this dis-

agreement
is hatweregard
these
pockets
asa partOf
the pharynx cavity. This is necessary as soon as there
is an acoustical mismatch between the pharynx and the
larynx. Apparently, Mermelstein did not count on the
possibility of this mismatch. His conclusions are applicable when the pharynx and the larynx are not mismatched.

VII.

smaller than in males. Also, accordingto Finch, the
differences betweenpoor and goodvoices are accompaniedby a larger difference in the sinus Morgagni in

low its maximum

die's work. t2 Mermelstein's conclusionswith respect

reduces

the risk that the

CONCLUSIONS

The acoustically most essential articulatory difference
between maie speech and singing appears to be the wid-

ening of the pharynx at the level of the larynx tube opening. Such a widening of the pharynx seems to be accompanying a lowering of the larynx. Acoustically, the
pharynx widening has the effect of isolating the larynx
tube from

the rest

of the vocal

tract

so that its reso-

nance frequency is not altered by articulatory movements

outside

it.

Its

resonance

can be tuned

to a fre-

quency between the third and fourth formant in normal
speech by adjusting the volume contained in the sinus
Morgagni to the opening area of the larynx tube. An additional effect of a larynx lowering is that it increases
the dimensions of the sinus pitiformes and the length of
the pharynx tube. This lowers the fifth formant frequency and in front vowels also the second. In this way a
great deal of the acoustical differences between spoken
and sung vowels in male voices can be explained with
reference to the larynx lowering, the major articulatory
gesture associated with the production of a "singing
formant."

VIII.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author gratefully acknowledgesvainable discus-

singer's voice is maskedby an orchestral accompani-

sions with J. Lindqvist-Gauffin, M. Sondhi, and B.

ment. The risk of masking is probably smaller in highpitched female singing, as all partials are higher in frequency than the strongest sounds from the accompani-

Lindblom.

He is also indebted

to Mrs.

S. Felicetti

for

editing the manuscript. The work was supported by the
Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Fund.

ment. Rs

Our results agreewith thosepresentedby Fant.• They
do not contradict van den Berg's interpretation of the
laryngeal ventricle, since he considers this cavity in

iSee, e.g., N. T. Bartholomew,"The Role of Imageryin Voice
Teaching," Nat. Assoc. of Teachers of Singing, USA, Research Committee Release No. 1 (May 1951).

isolation.to On the otherhand,the laryngeaiventricle

2G. Fant. "Onthe Predictabilityof FormantLevelsandSpec-

belongs to a resonant system: the entire larynx tube.
As demonstrated above, this tube may act as a separate
resonator. From the point of view of the acoustical effect of the ventricle, it seems better to regard it as a

trum Envelopesfrom Formant Frequencies," in Fo• Roman
Jal•obson(Mouton, The Hague, 1956), pp. 109-120.
3jo Sunalbert."The SourceSpectrumin Prof•aional Singing,"

part of the larynx tube. Since it contributes to the properties of the sound transfer system, it appears motivated
to consider it as belonging to that system instead of regarding it as a part of the voice source, as van den Berg

Fol. Phoniat. 25, 71--90 (1973).

4j. Sundberg,"FormantStructureandArticulationof Spoken
and SungVowels," Fol. Phoniat. 22, 28-48 (1970).

SG.Fant, G. Henningsson,
andU. St•lhammar,"FormantFrequencies of Swedish Vowels," STL-QPSR, Speech Transmission Lab., Quarterly Progress and Status Report, KTH,

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., VoL 55, No. 4, April 1974

wnloaded 28 Mar 2011 to 130.237.67.192. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/journals/doc/ASALIB-home/info/terms.

844

J. Sundberg:Singingformant

Stockholm, No. 4 (1964) pp. 26-31.

•See, e.g., the review over this field offeredby J. Large, "To-

844

Quarterly Progress and Status Report, Stockholm, No. 2-3

(1971), pp. 43--52.

wards an Integrated Physiologie--Acoustie Theory of Vocal
Registers," Nat. Assoc. of Teachers of Singing, USA, Bul-

laU. Ingard,"OntheTheoryandDesignof Acoustic
Resonators,"

let;tu (Feb. -March 1972), p. 18 if.

15Intheequationquoted(Eq. 4 in Ingard'sarticle) an indexhas

?G. Font, AcousticTheoryof SpeechP•roductiou
(Mouten,The
Hague, 1970), 2rid ed.

øM. Flach, "'lJberdie unterschiedliche
Gr6sseder Morgagnischen Ventrikel bei S•ngern," Fol. Phoniat. 16, 67-74 (1964).

sG. Beckmann,"DosVerhaltender Ober•ne bei der akustischen Ausschaltungder Kehlkopfventrikel," Fol. Phoniat. 10,
149--153 (1958).

been dropped out. In his previous work on the acoustics of
the larynx tube [STL--QPSR No. 1 (1972), pp. 45--53], the
author of the present paper did not observe this and this led
him to erroneously claim that the larynx tube acts as a Helmholz

resonator.

I•J. Lindqvist,"LaryngealArticulationStudiedonSwedishSubjects," STL-QPSR, Speech Transmission Lab., Quarterly

1øJw.vandenBerg, "Onthe Roleof theLaryngealVentricle
in Voice Production," Fol. Phoniat. 7, 57-69 (1955).

IiM. FinchandH. Schwickardie,
"Die RecessusPitiformes
unter phoniatrischer Sicht," Fol. Phoniat. 18, 153-167 (1966).

i2p. Mermelstein, "On the Pitiform Recessusandtheir Acoustic Effects," Fol. Phoniat. 19, 388--389 (1967).

13F.FranssonandE. Jansson,"Propertiesof theSTL-Ionophone transducer,"

J. Aeonst. Soe. Am. 25, 1037-1067 (1953).

STL-QPSR,

Speech Transmission Lab.,

ProgressandStatusReport, Stockholm,No. •-3 (1972), pp.
10-27.

•?B.LindbiotaandJ. Sundberg,"AcousticalConsequences
of
Lip, Tongue, Jaw, and Larynx Movement," J. Acoust. SOc.
Am. 50, 1166-1179 (1971).

18j. Sundberg,"ProductionandFunctionof the Singing
Formant," Proc. of the Eleventh Congr. of the International
Musicological Society Copenhagen, 1972 (forthcoming).

J. Acoust. Soe. Am., Vol. 55, No. 4, April 1974

ownloaded 28 Mar 2011 to 130.237.67.192. Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://asadl.org/journals/doc/ASALIB-home/info/terms.js
